Thank you. Muchas gracias.  Thank you so much.  Please. Thank you very much.
President Castro, the people of Cuba, thank you so much for the warm welcome that I havereceived, that my family have received, and that our delegation has received.  It is anextraordinary honor to be here today.
Before I begin, please indulge me.  I want to comment on the terrorist attacks that havetaken place in Brussels.  The thoughts and the prayers of the American people are with thepeople of Belgium.  We stand in solidarity with them in condemning these outrageous attacksagainst innocent people.  We will do whatever is necessary to support our friend and ally,Belgium, in bringing to justice those who are responsible.  And this is yet another reminderthat the world must unite, we must be together, regardless of nationality, or race, or faith, infighting against the scourge of terrorism.  We can -- and will -- defeat those who threaten thesafety and security of people all around the world.
To the government and the people of Cuba, I want to thank you for the kindness that you’veshown to me and Michelle, Malia, Sasha, my mother-in-law, Marian.
  
Cultivo una rosa blanca.1 In his most famous poem, Jose Martí made this offering of friendshipand peace to both his friend and his enemy.  Today, as the President of the United States ofAmerica, I offer the Cuban people el saludo de paz.2
Havana is only 90 miles from Florida, but to get here we had to travel a great distance -- overbarriers of history and ideology; barriers of pain and separation.  The blue waters beneath AirForce One once carried American battleships to this island -- to liberate, but also to exertcontrol over Cuba.  Those waters also carried generations of Cuban revolutionaries to theUnited States, where they built support for their cause.  And that short distance has beencrossed by hundreds of thousands of Cuban exiles -- on planes and makeshift rafts -- whocame to America in pursuit of freedom and opportunity, sometimes leaving behind everythingthey owned and every person that they loved.
Like so many people in both of our countries, my lifetime has spanned a time of isolationbetween us.  The Cuban Revolution took place the same year that my father came to theUnited States from Kenya.  The Bay of Pigs took place the year that I was born. The nextyear, the entire world held its breath, watching our two countries, as humanity came as closeas we ever have to the horror of nuclear war.  As the decades rolled by, our governmentssettled into a seemingly endless confrontation, fighting battles through proxies.  In a worldthat remade itself time and again, one constant was the conflict between the United Statesand Cuba.
I have come here to bury the last remnant of the Cold War in the Americas. I have come hereto extend the hand of friendship to the Cuban people.
I want to be clear:  The differences between our governments over these many years are realand they are important.  I’m sure President Castro would say the same thing -- I know,because I’ve heard him address those differences at length.  But before I discuss those issues,we also need to recognize how much we share.  Because in many ways, the United States andCuba are like two brothers who’ve been estranged for many years, even as we share thesame blood.
We both live in a new world, colonized by Europeans.  Cuba, like the United States, was builtin part by slaves brought here from Africa.  Like the United States, the Cuban people cantrace their heritage to both slaves and slave-owners.  We’ve welcomed both immigrants whocame a great distance to start new lives in the Americas.
  
Over the years, our cultures have blended together.  Dr. Carlos Finlay’s work in Cuba pavedthe way for generations of doctors, including Walter Reed, who drew on Dr. Finlay’s work tohelp combat Yellow Fever.  Just as Martí wrote some of his most famous words in New York,Ernest Hemingway made a home in Cuba, and found inspiration in the waters of theseshores.  We share a national past-time -- La Pelota -- and later today our players will competeon the same Havana field that Jackie Robinson played on before he made his Major Leaguedebut. And it's said that our greatest boxer, Muhammad Ali, once paid tribute to a Cuban thathe could never fight -- saying that he would only be able to reach a draw with the greatCuban, Teofilo Stevenson.
So even as our governments became adversaries, our people continued to share thesecommon passions, particularly as so many Cubans came to America.  In Miami or Havana, youcan find places to dance the Cha-Cha-Cha or the Salsa, and eat ropa vieja.  People in both ofour countries have sung along with Celia Cruz or Gloria Estefan, and now listen to reggaetonor Pitbull.  Millions of our people share a common religion -- a faith that I paid tribute to at theShrine of our Lady of Charity in Miami, a peace that Cubans find in La Cachita.
For all of our differences, the Cuban and American people share common values in their ownlives.  A sense of patriotism and a sense of pride -- a lot of pride.  A profound love of family. A passion for our children, a commitment to their education.  And that's why I believe ourgrandchildren will look back on this period of isolation as an aberration, as just one chapter ina longer story of family and of friendship.
But we cannot, and should not, ignore the very real differences that we have -- about how weorganize our governments, our economies, and our societies.  Cuba has a one-party system;the United States is a multi-party democracy.  Cuba has a socialist economic model; theUnited States is an open market.  Cuba has emphasized the role and rights of the state; theUnited States is founded upon the rights of the individual.
Despite these differences, on December 17th 2014, President Castro and I announced that theUnited States and Cuba would begin a process to normalize relations between ourcountries. Since then, we have established diplomatic relations and opened embassies.  We'vebegun initiatives to cooperate on health and agriculture, education and law enforcement. We've reached agreements to restore direct flights and mail service.  We've expandedcommercial ties, and increased the capacity of Americans to travel and do business in Cuba.
  
And these changes have been welcomed, even though there are still opponents to thesepolicies.  But still, many people on both sides of this debate have asked:  Why now?  Whynow?
There is one simple answer:  What the United States was doing was not working.  We have tohave the courage to acknowledge that truth.  A policy of isolation designed for the Cold Warmade little sense in the 21st century.  The embargo was only hurting the Cuban peopleinstead of helping them.  And I've always believed in what Martin Luther King, Jr. called “thefierce urgency of now”3 -- we should not fear change, we should embrace it.
That leads me to a bigger and more important reason for these changes:  Creo en el puebloCubano.  I believe in the Cuban people. This is not just a policy of normalizing relations withthe Cuban government.  The United States of America is normalizing relations with the Cubanpeople.
And today, I want to share with you my vision of what our future can be.  I want the Cubanpeople -- especially the young people -- to understand why I believe that you should look tothe future with hope; not the false promise which insists that things are better than theyreally are, or the blind optimism that says all your problems can go away tomorrow.  Hopethat is rooted in the future that you can choose and that you can shape, and that you canbuild for your country.
I'm hopeful because I believe that the Cuban people are as innovative as any people in theworld.
In a global economy, powered by ideas and information, a country’s greatest asset is itspeople.  In the United States, we have a clear monument to what the Cuban people can build:it’s called Miami.  Here in Havana, we see that same talent in cuentapropistas, cooperativesand old cars that still run.  El Cubano inventa del aire.
Cuba has an extraordinary resource -- a system of education which values every boy andevery girl. And in recent years, the Cuban government has begun to open up to the world,and to open up more space for that talent to thrive.  In just a few years, we've seen howcuentapropistas can succeed while sustaining a distinctly Cuban spirit.  Being self-employed isnot about becoming more like America, it’s about being yourself.
  
Look at Sandra Lidice Aldama, who chose to start a small business.  Cubans, she said, can“innovate and adapt without losing our identity…our secret is in not copying or imitating butsimply being ourselves.”
Look at Papito Valladeres, a barber, whose success allowed him to improve conditions in hisneighborhood.  “I realize I’m not going to solve all of the world’s problems,” he said.  “But if Ican solve problems in the little piece of the world where I live, it can ripple across Havana.”
That’s where hope begins -- with the ability to earn your own living, and to build somethingyou can be proud of.  That’s why our policies focus on supporting Cubans, instead of hurtingthem.  That’s why we got rid of limits on remittances -- so ordinary Cubans have moreresources.  That’s why we’re encouraging travel -- which will build bridges between ourpeople, and bring more revenue to those Cuban small businesses. That’s why we’ve openedup space for commerce and exchanges -- so that Americans and Cubans can work together tofind cures for diseases, and create jobs, and open the door to more opportunity for the Cubanpeople.
As President of the United States, I’ve called on our Congress to lift the embargo. It is anoutdated burden on the Cuban people.  It's a burden on the Americans who want to work anddo business or invest here in Cuba.  It's time to lift the embargo.  But even if we lifted theembargo tomorrow, Cubans would not realize their potential without continued change here inCuba. It should be easier to open a business here in Cuba.  A worker should be able to get ajob directly with companies who invest here in Cuba.  Two currencies shouldn’t separate thetype of salaries that Cubans can earn.
The Internet should be available across the island, so that Cubans can connect to the widerworld -- and to one of the greatest engines of growth in human history.
There’s no limitation from the United States on the ability of Cuba to take these steps.  It’s upto you.  And I can tell you as a friend that sustainable prosperity in the 21st century dependsupon education, health care, and environmental protection.  But it also depends on the freeand open exchange of ideas.  If you can’t access information online, if you cannot be exposedto different points of view, you will not reach your full potential.  And over time, the youth willlose hope.
  
I know these issues are sensitive, especially coming from an American President.  Before1959, some Americans saw Cuba as something to exploit, ignored poverty, enabledcorruption.  And since 1959, we’ve been shadow-boxers in this battle of geopolitics andpersonalities.  I know the history, but I refuse to be trapped by it.
I’ve made it clear that the United States has neither the capacity, nor the intention to imposechange on Cuba.  What changes come will depend upon the Cuban people.  We will notimpose our political or economic system on you.  We recognize that every country, everypeople, must chart its own course and shape its own model.  But having removed the shadowof history from our relationship, I must speak honestly about the things that I believe -- thethings that we, as Americans, believe.  As Martí said, “Liberty is the right of every man to behonest, to think and to speak without hypocrisy.”4
So let me tell you what I believe.  I can't force you to agree, but you should know what Ithink.  I believe that every person should be equal under the law. Every child deserves thedignity that comes with education, and health care and food on the table and a roof over theirheads. I believe citizens should be free to speak their mind without fear -- to organize, and tocriticize their government, and to protest peacefully, and that the rule of law should notinclude arbitrary detentions of people who exercise those rights. I believe that every personshould have the freedom to practice their faith peacefully and publicly.  And, yes, I believevoters should be able to choose their governments in free and democratic elections.
Not everybody agrees with me on this.  Not everybody agrees with the American people onthis.  But I believe those human rights are universal. I believe they are the rights of theAmerican people, the Cuban people, and people around the world.
Now, there’s no secret that our governments disagree on many of these issues.  I’ve hadfrank conversations with President Castro.  For many years, he has pointed out the flaws inthe American system -- economic inequality; the death penalty; racial discrimination; warsabroad.  That’s just a sample.  He has a much longer list.  But here’s what the Cuban peopleneed to understand:  I welcome this open debate and dialogue. It’s good.  It’s healthy.  I’mnot afraid of it.
We do have too much money in American politics.  But, in America, it's still possible forsomebody like me -- a child who was raised by a single mom, a child of mixed race who didnot have a lot of money -- to pursue and achieve the highest office in the land.  That's what’spossible in America.
  
We do have challenges with racial bias -- in our communities, in our criminal justice system,in our society -- the legacy of slavery and segregation.  But the fact that we have opendebates within America’s own democracy is what allows us to get better.  In 1959, the yearthat my father moved to America, it was illegal for him to marry my mother, who was white,in many American states.  When I first started school, we were still struggling to desegregateschools across the American South.  But people organized; they protested; they debatedthese issues; they challenged government officials.  And because of those protests, andbecause of those debates, and because of popular mobilization, I’m able to stand here todayas an African-American and as President of the United States.  That was because of thefreedoms that were afforded in the United States that we were able to bring about change.
I’m not saying this is easy.  There’s still enormous problems in our society.  But democracy isthe way that we solve them.  That's how we got health care for more of our people.  That'show we made enormous gains in women’s rights and gay rights.  That's how we address theinequality that concentrates so much wealth at the top of our society.  Because workers canorganize and ordinary people have a voice, American democracy has given our people theopportunity to pursue their dreams and enjoy a high standard of living.
Now, there are still some tough fights.  It isn’t always pretty, the process of democracy.   It'soften frustrating.  You can see that in the election going on back home.  But just stop andconsider this fact about the American campaign that's taking place right now.  You had twoCuban Americans in the Republican Party5, running against the legacy of a black man who isPresident, while arguing that they’re the best person to beat the Democratic nominee who willeither be a woman or a Democratic Socialist.   Who would have believed that back in 1959? That's a measure of our progress as a democracy.
So here’s my message to the Cuban government and the Cuban people:  The ideals that arethe starting point for every revolution -- America’s revolution, Cuba’s revolution, the liberationmovements around the world -- those ideals find their truest expression, I believe, indemocracy.  Not because American democracy is perfect, but precisely because we’re not. And we -- like every country -- need the space that democracy gives us to change.  It givesindividuals the capacity to be catalysts to think in new ways, and to re-imagine how oursociety should be, and to make them better.
There’s already an evolution taking place inside of Cuba, a generational change.  Manysuggested that I come here and ask the people of Cuba to tear something down -- but I’mappealing to the young people of Cuba who will lift something up, build something new. Elfuturo  de Cuba tiene que estar en las manos del pueblo Cubano.6
  
And to President Castro -- who I appreciate being here today -- I want you to know, I believemy visit here demonstrates you do not need to fear a threat from the United States.  Andgiven your commitment to Cuba’s sovereignty and self-determination, I am also confident thatyou need not fear the different voices of the Cuban people -- and their capacity to speak, andassemble, and vote for their leaders.  In fact, I’m hopeful for the future because I trust thatthe Cuban people will make the right decisions.
And as you do, I’m also confident that Cuba can continue to play an important role in thehemisphere and around the globe -- and my hope is, is that you can do so as a partner withthe United States.
We’ve played very different roles in the world.  But no one should deny the service thatthousands of Cuban doctors have delivered for the poor and suffering. Last year, Americanhealth care workers -- and the U.S. military -- worked side-by-side with Cubans to save livesand stamp out Ebola in West Africa.  I believe that we should continue that kind ofcooperation in other countries.
We’ve been on the different side of so many conflicts in the Americas.  But today, Americansand Cubans are sitting together at the negotiating table, and we are helping the Colombianpeople resolve a civil war that’s dragged on for decades. That kind of cooperation is good foreverybody.  It gives everyone in this hemisphere hope.
We took different journeys to our support for the people of South Africa in ending apartheid.
But President Castro and I could both be there in Johannesburg to pay tribute to the legacy ofthe great Nelson Mandela. And in examining his life and his words, I'm sure we both realizewe have more work to do to promote equality in our own countries -- to reduce discriminationbased on race in our own countries.  And in Cuba, we want our engagement to help lift up theCubans who are of African descent -- who’ve proven that there’s nothing they cannot achievewhen given the chance.
We’ve been a part of different blocs of nations in the hemisphere, and we will continue to haveprofound differences about how to promote peace, security, opportunity, and human rights. But as we normalize our relations, I believe it can help foster a greater sense of unity in theAmericas -- todos somos Americanos.7
  
From the beginning of my time in office, I’ve urged the people of the Americas to leave behindthe ideological battles of the past.  We are in a new era.  I know that many of the issues thatI’ve talked about lack the drama of the past.  And I know that part of Cuba’s identity is itspride in being a small island nation that could stand up for its rights, and shake the world. ButI also know that Cuba will always stand out because of the talent, hard work, and pride of theCuban people.  That's your strength. Cuba doesn’t have to be defined by being against theUnited States, any more than the United States should be defined by being against Cuba.  I'mhopeful for the future because of the reconciliation that’s taking place among the Cubanpeople.
I know that for some Cubans on the island, there may be a sense that those who leftsomehow supported the old order in Cuba.  I'm sure there’s a narrative that lingers herewhich suggests that Cuban exiles ignored the problems of pre-Revolutionary Cuba, andrejected the struggle to build a new future.  But I can tell you today that so many Cubanexiles carry a memory of painful -- and sometimes violent -- separation.  They love Cuba.  Apart of them still considers this their true home. That’s why their passion is so strong.  That'swhy their heartache is so great.  And for the Cuban American community that I’ve come toknow and respect, this is not just about politics. This is about family -- the memory of a homethat was lost; the desire to rebuild a broken bond; the hope for a better future the hope forreturn and reconciliation.
For all of the politics, people are people, and Cubans are Cubans.  And I’ve come here -- I’vetraveled this distance -- on a bridge that was built by Cubans on both sides of the FloridaStraits.  I first got to know the talent and passion of the Cuban people in America.  And Iknow how they have suffered more than the pain of exile -- they also know what it’s like to bean outsider, and to struggle, and to work harder to make sure their children can reach higherin America.
So the reconciliation of the Cuban people -- the children and grandchildren of revolution, andthe children and grandchildren of exile -- that is fundamental to Cuba’s future.
You see it in Gloria Gonzalez, who traveled here in 2013 for the first time after 61 years ofseparation, and was met by her sister, Llorca.  “You recognized me, but I didn’t recognizeyou,” Gloria said after she embraced her sibling.  Imagine that, after 61 years.
  
You see it in Melinda Lopez, who came to her family’s old home.  And as she was walking thestreets, an elderly woman recognized her as her mother’s daughter, and began to cry.  Shetook her into her home and showed her a pile of photos that included Melinda’s baby picture,which her mother had sent 50 years ago.  Melinda later said, “So many of us are now gettingso much back.”
You see it in Cristian Miguel Soler, a young man who became the first of his family to travelhere after 50 years.  And meeting relatives for the first time, he said, “I realized that family isfamily no matter the distance between us.”
Sometimes the most important changes start in small places. The tides of history can leavepeople in conflict and exile and poverty.  It takes time for those circumstances to change.  Butthe recognition of a common humanity, the reconciliation of people bound by blood and abelief in one another -- that’s where progress begins.  Understanding, and listening, andforgiveness. And if the Cuban people face the future together, it will be more likely that theyoung people of today will be able to live with dignity and achieve their dreams right here inCuba.
The history of the United States and Cuba encompass revolution and conflict; struggle andsacrifice; retribution and, now, reconciliation.  It is time, now, for us to leave the past behind. It is time for us to look forward to the future together -- un future de esperanza.8  And it won’tbe easy, and there will be setbacks.  It will take time.  But my time here in Cuba renews myhope and my confidence in what the Cuban people will do.  We can make this journey asfriends, and as neighbors, and as family -- together.
Si se puede.  Muchas gracias.
1 “Cultivate a White Rose” [English translation] 
2 "The Kiss of Peace" [Google English translation]
3 Phrase used in Dr. King's I Have A Dream and Beyond Vietnam speeches, among others.
4  Martí, J. (1889). Tres Heroes. La Edad de Oro.
5 Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio
  
6 "The future of Cuba must be in the hands of the Cuban people." [Google English translation]
7 "We are all Americans." [Google English translation]
8 "a future of hope"  [Google English translation]
