Good evening, everybody.  I just want to make a few brief comments about the attacks acrossParis tonight.  Once again, we’ve seen an outrageous attempt to terrorize innocent civilians.
This is an attack not just on Paris, it’s an attack not just on the people of France, but this is anattack on all of humanity and the universal values that we share.
We stand prepared and ready to provide whatever assistance that the government and thepeople of France need to respond.  France is our oldest ally.  The French people have stoodshoulder to shoulder with the United States time and again.  And we want to be very clearthat we stand together with them in the fight against terrorism and extremism.
Paris itself represents the timeless values of human progress.  Those who think that they canterrorize the people of France or the values that they stand for are wrong.  The Americanpeople draw strength from the French people’s commitment to life, liberty, the pursuit ofhappiness.
  
We are reminded in this time of tragedy that the bonds of liberté and égalité and fraternitéare not only values that the French people care so deeply about, but they are values that weshare.  And those values are going to endure far beyond any act of terrorism or the hatefulvision of those who perpetrated the crimes this evening.
We’re going to do whatever it takes to work with the French people and with nations aroundthe world to bring these terrorists to justice, and to go after any terrorist networks that goafter our people.
We don’t yet know all the details of what has happened.  We have been in contact with Frenchofficials to communicate our deepest condolences to the families of those who have beenkilled, to offer our prayers and thoughts to those who have been wounded.  We have offeredour full support to them.
The situation is still unfolding.  I’ve chosen not to call President Hollande at this time, becausemy expectation is that he’s very busy at the moment.  I actually, by coincidence, was talkingto him earlier today in preparation for the G20 meeting.  But I am confident that I’ll be indirect communications with him in the next few days, and we’ll be coordinating in any waysthat they think are helpful in the investigation of what’s happened.
This is a heartbreaking situation.  And obviously those of us here in the United States knowwhat it’s like.  We’ve gone through these kinds of episodes ourselves.  And whenever thesekinds of attacks happened, we’ve always been able to count on the French people to standwith us.  They have been an extraordinary counterterrorism partner, and we intend to bethere with them in that same fashion.
I’m sure that in the days ahead we’ll learn more about exactly what happened, and my teamswill make sure that we are in communication with the press to provide you accurateinformation.  I don’t want to speculate at this point in terms of who was responsible for this. It appears that there may still be live activity and dangers that are taking place as we speak. And so until we know from French officials that the situation is under control, and we have formore information about it, I don’t want to speculate.
Okay? Thank you very much.
