Thank you, so much.
My Lord Chancellor, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Prime Minister, my lords, and members of the House ofCommons:
I have known few greater honors than the opportunity to address the Mother of Parliaments atWestminster Hall. I am told that the last three speakers here have been the Pope, Her Majestythe Queen, and Nelson Mandela -- which is either a very high bar or the beginning of a veryfunny joke.
I come here today to reaffirm one of the oldest, one of the strongest alliances the world hasever known. It’s long been said that the United States and the United Kingdom share a specialrelationship. And since we also share an especially active press corps, that relationship isoften analyzed and overanalyzed for the slightest hint of stress or strain.
Of course, all relationships have their ups and downs. Admittedly, ours got off on the wrongfoot with a small scrape about tea and taxes. There may also have been some hurt feelingswhen the White House was set on fire during the War of 1812. But fortunately, it’s beensmooth sailing ever since.
The reason for this close friendship doesn’t just have to do with our shared history, our sharedheritage; our ties of language and culture; or even the strong partnership between ourgovernments. Our relationship is special because of the values and beliefs that have unitedour people through the ages.
  
Centuries ago, when kings, emperors, and warlords reigned over much of the world, it wasthe English who first spelled out the rights and liberties of man in the Magna Carta. It washere, in this very hall, where the rule of law first developed, courts were established, disputeswere settled, and citizens came to petition their leaders.
Over time, the people of this nation waged a long and sometimes bloody struggle to expandand secure their freedom from the crown. Propelled by the ideals of the Enlightenment, theywould ultimately forge an English Bill of Rights, and invest the power to govern in an electedparliament that’s gathered here today.
What began on this island would inspire millions throughout the continent of Europe andacross the world. But perhaps no one drew greater inspiration from these notions of freedomthan your rabble-rousing colonists on the other side of the Atlantic. As Winston Churchill said,the --
…Magna Carta, the Bill of Rights, Habeas Corpus, trial by jury, and English common lawfind their most famous expression in the American Declaration of Independence.
For both of our nations, living up to the ideals enshrined in these founding documents hassometimes been difficult, has always been a work in progress. The path has never beenperfect. But through the struggles of slaves and immigrants, women and ethnic minorities,former colonies and persecuted religions, we have learned better than most that the longingfor freedom and human dignity is not English or American or Western -- it is universal, and itbeats in every heart. Perhaps that’s why there are few nations that stand firmer, speaklouder, and fight harder to defend democratic values around the world than the United Statesand the United Kingdom.
We are the allies who landed at Omaha and Gold, who sacrificed side by side to free acontinent from the march of tyranny, and help prosperity flourish from the ruins of war. Andwith the founding of NATO -- a British idea -- we joined a transatlantic alliance that hasensured our security for over half a century.
Together with our allies, we forged a lasting peace from a cold war. When the Iron Curtainlifted, we expanded our alliance to include the nations of Central and Eastern Europe, andbuilt new bridges to Russia and the former states of the Soviet Union. And when there wasstrife in the Balkans, we worked together to keep the peace.
Today, after a difficult decade that began with war and ended in recession, our nations havearrived at a pivotal moment once more. A global economy that once stood on the brink ofdepression is now stable and recovering. After years of conflict, the United States hasremoved 100,000 troops from Iraq, the United Kingdom has removed its forces, and ourcombat mission there has ended.
  
In Afghanistan, we’ve broken the Taliban’s momentum and will soon begin a transition toAfghan lead. And nearly 10 years after 9/11, we have disrupted terrorist networks and dealt alQaeda a huge blow by killing its leader -- Osama bin Laden.
Together, we have met great challenges. But as we enter this new chapter in our sharedhistory, profound challenges stretch before us. In a world where the prosperity of all nations isnow inextricably linked, a new era of cooperation is required to ensure the growth andstability of the global economy. As new threats spread across borders and oceans, we mustdismantle terrorist networks and stop the spread of nuclear weapons, confront climate changeand combat famine and disease. And as a revolution races through the streets of the MiddleEast and North Africa, the entire world has a stake in the aspirations of a generation thatlongs to determine its own destiny.
These challenges come at a time when the international order has already been reshaped for anew century. Countries like China, India, and Brazil are growing by leaps and bounds. Weshould welcome this development, for it has lifted hundreds of millions from poverty aroundthe globe, and created new markets and opportunities for our own nations.
And yet, as this rapid change has taken place, it’s become fashionable in some quarters toquestion whether the rise of these nations will accompany the decline of American andEuropean influence around the world. Perhaps, the argument goes, these nations representthe future, and the time for our leadership has passed.
That argument is wrong. The time for our leadership is now. It was the United States and theUnited Kingdom and our democratic allies that shaped a world in which new nations couldemerge and individuals could thrive. And even as more nations take on the responsibilities ofglobal leadership, our alliance will remain indispensable to the goal of a century that is morepeaceful, more prosperous and more just.
At a time when threats and challenges require nations to work in concert with one another, weremain the greatest catalysts for global action. In an era defined by the rapid flow ofcommerce and information, it is our free market tradition, our openness, fortified by ourcommitment to basic security for our citizens, that offers the best chance of prosperity that isboth strong and shared. As millions are still denied their basic human rights because of whothey are, or what they believe, or the kind of government that they live under, we are thenations most willing to stand up for the values of tolerance and self-determination that lead topeace and dignity.
Now, this doesn’t mean we can afford to stand still. The nature of our leadership will need tochange with the times. As I said the first time I came to London as President, for the G20summit, the days are gone when Roosevelt and Churchill could sit in a room and solve theworld’s problems over a glass of brandy -- although I’m sure that Prime Minister Cameronwould agree that some days we could both use a stiff drink.
  
In this century, our joint leadership will require building new partnerships, adapting to newcircumstances, and remaking ourselves to meet the demands of a new era.
That begins with our economic leadership.
Adam Smith’s central insight remains true today: There is no greater generator of wealth andinnovation than a system of free enterprise that unleashes the full potential of individual menand women. That’s what led to the Industrial Revolution that began in the factories ofManchester. That is what led to the dawn of the Information Age that arose from the officeparks of Silicon Valley. That’s why countries like China, India and Brazil are growing so rapidly-- because in fits and starts, they are moving toward market-based principles that the UnitedStates and the United Kingdom have always embraced.
In other words, we live in a global economy that is largely of our own making. And today, thecompetition for the best jobs and industries favors countries that are free-thinking andforward-looking; countries with the most creative and innovative and entrepreneurial citizens.
That gives nations like the United States and the United Kingdom an inherent advantage. Forfrom Newton and Darwin to Edison and Einstein, from Alan Turing to Steve Jobs, we have ledthe world in our commitment to science and cutting-edge research, the discovery of newmedicines and technologies. We educate our citizens and train our workers in the bestcolleges and universities on Earth. But to maintain this advantage in a world that’s morecompetitive than ever, we will have to redouble our investments in science and engineering,and renew our national commitments to educating our workforces.
We’ve also been reminded in the last few years that markets can sometimes fail. In the lastcentury, both our nations put in place regulatory frameworks to deal with such market failures-- safeguards to protect the banking system after the Great Depression, for example;regulations that were established to prevent the pollution of our air and water during the1970s.
But in today’s economy, such threats of market failure can no longer be contained within theborders of any one country. Market failures can go global, and go viral, and demandinternational responses.
A financial crisis that began on Wall Street infected nearly every continent, which is why wemust keep working through forums like the G20 to put in place global rules of the road toprevent future excesses and abuse. No country can hide from the dangers of carbon pollution,which is why we must build on what was achieved at Copenhagen and Cancun to leave ourchildren a planet that is safer and cleaner.
  
Moreover, even when the free market works as it should, both our countries recognize that nomatter how responsibly we live in our lives, hard times or bad luck, a crippling illness or alayoff may strike any one of us. And so part of our common tradition has expressed itself in aconviction that every citizen deserves a basic measure of security -- health care if you getsick, unemployment insurance if you lose your job, a dignified retirement after a lifetime ofhard work. That commitment to our citizens has also been the reason for our leadership in theworld.
And now, having come through a terrible recession, our challenge is to meet these obligationswhile ensuring that we’re not consuming -- and hence consumed with -- a level of debt thatcould sap the strength and vitality of our economies. And that will require difficult choices andit will require different paths for both of our countries. But we have faced such challengesbefore, and have always been able to balance the need for fiscal responsibility with theresponsibilities we have to one another.
And I believe we can do this again. As we do, the successes and failures of our own past canserve as an example for emerging economies -- that it’s possible to grow without polluting;that lasting prosperity comes not from what a nation consumes, but from what it produces,and from the investments it makes in its people and its infrastructure.
And just as we must lead on behalf of the prosperity of our citizens, so we must safeguardtheir security. Our two nations know what it is to confront evil in the world.  Hitler’s armieswould not have stopped their killing had we not fought them on the beaches and on thelanding grounds, in the fields and on the streets. We must never forget that there was nothinginevitable about our victory in that terrible war. It was won through the courage and characterof our people.
Precisely because we are willing to bear its burden, we know well the cost of war.  And that iswhy we built an alliance that was strong enough to defend this continent while deterring ourenemies. At its core, NATO is rooted in the simple concept of Article Five: that no NATO nationwill have to fend on its own; that allies will stand by one another, always. And for six decades,NATO has been the most successful alliance in human history.
Today, we confront a different enemy. Terrorists have taken the lives of our citizens in NewYork and in London. And while al Qaeda seeks a religious war with the West, we mustremember that they have killed thousands of Muslims -- men, women and children -- aroundthe globe. Our nations are not and will never be at war with Islam.  Our fight is focused ondefeating al Qaeda and its extremist allies. In that effort, we will not relent, as Osama binLaden and his followers have learned. And as we fight an enemy that respects no law of war,we will continue to hold ourselves to a higher standard -- by living up to the values, the ruleof law and due process that we so ardently defend.
  
For almost a decade, Afghanistan has been a central front of these efforts.  Throughout thoseyears, you, the British people, have been a stalwart ally, along with so many others who fightby our side.
Together, let us pay tribute to all of our men and women who have served and sacrificed overthe last several years -- for they are part of an unbroken line of heroes who have borne theheaviest burden for the freedoms that we enjoy. Because of them, we have broken theTaliban’s momentum. Because of them, we have built the capacity of Afghan securityforces. And because of them, we are now preparing to turn a corner in Afghanistan bytransitioning to Afghan lead. And during this transition, we will pursue a lasting peace withthose who break free of al Qaeda and respect the Afghan constitution and lay down arms. Andwe will ensure that Afghanistan is never a safe haven for terror, but is instead a country thatis strong, sovereign, and able to stand on its own two feet.
Indeed, our efforts in this young century have led us to a new concept for NATO that will giveus the capabilities needed to meet new threats -- threats like terrorism and piracy, cyberattacks and ballistic missiles. But a revitalized NATO will continue to hew to that original visionof its founders, allowing us to rally collective action for the defense of our people, whilebuilding upon the broader belief of Roosevelt and Churchill that all nations have both rightsand responsibilities, and all nations share a common interest in an international architecturethat maintains the peace.
We also share a common interest in stopping the spread of nuclear weapons. Across theglobe, nations are locking down nuclear materials so they never fall into the wrong hands --because of our leadership. From North Korea to Iran, we’ve sent a message that those whoflaunt their obligations will face consequences -- which is why America and the EuropeanUnion just recently strengthened our sanctions on Iran, in large part because of the leadershipof the United Kingdom and the United States. And while we hold others to account, we willmeet our own obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and strive for a world withoutnuclear weapons.
We share a common interest in resolving conflicts that prolong human suffering and threatento tear whole regions asunder. In Sudan, after years of war and thousands of deaths, we callon both North and South to pull back from the brink of violence and choose the path ofpeace. And in the Middle East, we stand united in our support for a secure Israel and asovereign Palestine.
And we share a common interest in development that advances dignity and security. Tosucceed, we must cast aside the impulse to look at impoverished parts of the globe as a placefor charity. Instead, we should empower the same forces that have allowed our own people tothrive: We should help the hungry to feed themselves, the doctors who care for the sick. Weshould support countries that confront corruption, and allow their people to innovate. And weshould advance the truth that nations prosper when they allow women and girls to reach theirfull potential.
  
We do these things because we believe not simply in the rights of nations; we believe in therights of citizens. That is the beacon that guided us through our fight against fascism and ourtwilight struggle against communism. And today, that idea is being put to the test in theMiddle East and North Africa. In country after country, people are mobilizing to freethemselves from the grip of an iron fist. And while these movements for change are just sixmonths old, we have seen them play out before -- from Eastern Europe to the Americas, fromSouth Africa to Southeast Asia.
History tells us that democracy is not easy. It will be years before these revolutions reachtheir conclusion, and there will be difficult days along the way. Power rarely gives up without afight -- particularly in places where there are divisions of tribe and divisions of sect. We alsoknow that populism can take dangerous turns -- from the extremism of those who would usedemocracy to deny minority rights, to the nationalism that left so many scars on thiscontinent in the 20th century.
But make no mistake: What we saw, what we are seeing in Tehran, in Tunis, in Tahrir Square,is a longing for the same freedoms that we take for granted here at home. It was a rejectionof the notion that people in certain parts of the world don’t want to be free, or need to havedemocracy imposed upon them. It was a rebuke to the worldview of al Qaeda, which smothersthe rights of individuals, and would thereby subject them to perpetual poverty and violence.
Let there be no doubt: The United States and United Kingdom stand squarely on the side ofthose who long to be free. And now, we must show that we will back up those words withdeeds. That means investing in the future of those nations that transition to democracy,starting with Tunisia and Egypt -- by deepening ties of trade and commerce; by helping themdemonstrate that freedom brings prosperity. And that means standing up for universal rights -
- by sanctioning those who pursue repression, strengthening civil society, supporting therights of minorities.
We do this knowing that the West must overcome suspicion and mistrust among many in theMiddle East and North Africa -- a mistrust that is rooted in a difficult past. For years, we’vefaced charges of hypocrisy from those who do not enjoy the freedoms that they hear usespouse. And so to them, we must squarely acknowledge that, yes, we have enduringinterests in the region -- to fight terror, sometimes with partners who may not be perfect; toprotect against disruptions of the world’s energy supply. But we must also insist that we rejectas false the choice between our interests and our ideals; between stability and democracy. Forour idealism is rooted in the realities of history -- that repression offers only the false promiseof stability, that societies are more successful when their citizens are free, and thatdemocracies are the closest allies we have.
It is that truth that guides our action in Libya. It would have been easy at the outset of thecrackdown in Libya to say that none of this was our business -- that a nation’s sovereignty ismore important than the slaughter of civilians within its borders.
  
That argument carries weight with some. But we are different. We embrace a broaderresponsibility. And while we cannot stop every injustice, there are circumstances that cutthrough our caution -- when a leader is threatening to massacre his people, and theinternational community is calling for action. That’s why we stopped a massacre in Libya.  Andwe will not relent until the people of Libya are protected and the shadow of tyranny is lifted.
We will proceed with humility, and the knowledge that we cannot dictate every outcomeabroad. Ultimately, freedom must be won by the people themselves, not imposed fromwithout. But we can and must stand with those who so struggle.  Because we have alwaysbelieved that the future of our children and grandchildren will be better if other people’schildren and grandchildren are more prosperous and more free -- from the beaches ofNormandy to the Balkans to Benghazi. That is our interests and our ideals. And if we fail tomeet that responsibility, who would take our place, and what kind of world would we pass on?
Our action -- our leadership -- is essential to the cause of human dignity. And so we must act-- and lead -- with confidence in our ideals, and an abiding faith in the character of ourpeople, who sent us all here today.
For there is one final quality that I believe makes the United States and the United Kingdomindispensable to this moment in history. And that is how we define ourselves as nations.
Unlike most countries in the world, we do not define citizenship based on race or ethnicity.
 Being American or British is not about belonging to a certain group;
it’s about believing in a certain set of ideals -- the rights of individuals, the rule of law. That iswhy we hold incredible diversity within our borders. That’s why there are people around theworld right now who believe that if they come to America, if they come to New York, if theycome to London, if they work hard, they can pledge allegiance to our flag and call themselvesAmericans; if they come to England, they can make a new life for themselves and can singGod Save The Queen just like any other citizen.
Yes, our diversity can lead to tension. And throughout our history there have been heateddebates about immigration and assimilation in both of our countries. But even as thesedebates can be difficult, we fundamentally recognize that our patchwork heritage is anenormous strength -- that in a world which will only grow smaller and more interconnected,the example of our two nations says it is possible for people to be united by their ideals,instead of divided by their differences; that it’s possible for hearts to change and old hatredsto pass; that it’s possible for the sons and daughters of former colonies to sit here as
  
members of this great Parliament, and for the grandson of a Kenyan who served as a cook inthe British Army to stand before you as President of the United States.
That is what defines us. That is why the young men and women in the streets of Damascusand Cairo still reach for the rights our citizens enjoy, even if they sometimes differ with ourpolicies. As two of the most powerful nations in the history of the world, we must alwaysremember that the true source of our influence hasn’t just been the size of our economies, orthe reach of our militaries, or the land that we’ve claimed. It has been the values that wemust never waver in defending around the world -- the idea that all beings are endowed byour Creator with certain rights that cannot be denied.
That is what forged our bond in the fire of war -- a bond made manifest by the friendshipbetween two of our greatest leaders. Churchill and Roosevelt had their differences. They werekeen observers of each other’s blind spots and shortcomings, if not always their own, andthey were hard-headed about their ability to remake the world. But what joined the fates ofthese two men at that particular moment in history was not simply a shared interest in victoryon the battlefield. It was a shared belief in the ultimate triumph of human freedom and humandignity -- a conviction that we have a say in how this story ends.
This conviction lives on in their people today. The challenges we face are great. The workbefore us is hard. But we have come through a difficult decade, and whenever the tests andtrials ahead may seem too big or too many, let us turn to their example, and the words thatChurchill spoke on the day that Europe was freed:
In the long years to come, not only will the people of this island but…the world,wherever the bird of freedom chirps in [the] human heart, look back to what we’vedone, and they will say ‘do not despair, do not yield…march straightforward’.
With courage and purpose, with humility and with hope, with faith in the promise oftomorrow, let us march straightforward together, enduring allies in the cause of a world thatis more peaceful, more prosperous, and more just.
Thank you very much.
