It is wonderful to be here in the Upper Peninsula with so many Yoopers.  How many of you areGreen Bay fans, too?  I’ve been seeing too many Green Bay fans lately. It is great to be here.  It is great to be at Northern Michigan University.  We’ve got somewonderful guests here that I just want to mention.  First of all, somebody who is as good apublic servant, not just good at what he does but good at heart and works tirelessly on behalfof the entire state, your senior senator, Carl Levin, is here.  Now, his partner in the Senatecould not be here because she’s actually leading a Democratic caucus retreat, but she’s beenfighting for manufacturing, for broadband, for a lot of things that we’re talking about heretoday.  So I just want to acknowledge Debbie Stabenow, who deeply cares about the workthat you do up here. I want to thank the great hospitality of Mayor John Kivela, who has been showing me aroundtown.  Thank you so much, Mayor Kivela. The President of Northern Michigan University, Dr.Les Wong, is here. And all of you are here. And you guys are pretty special.  Absolutely.   Before I begin, I just want to say that we are following today’s events in Egypt very closely.And we’ll have more to say as this plays out.  But what is absolutely clear is that we arewitnessing history unfold.  It’s a moment of transformation that’s taking place because thepeople of Egypt are calling for change.  And they’ve turned out in extraordinary numbersrepresenting all ages and all walks of life, but it’s young people who’ve been at the forefront --a new generation, your generation, who want their voices to be heard.  And so going forward,we want those young people and we want all Egyptians to know America will continue to doeverything that we can to support an orderly and genuine transition to democracy in Egypt.
  
 Now, as we watch what’s taking place, we’re also reminded that we live in an interconnectedworld.  What happens across the globe has an impact on each and every one of us.  And that’swhy I’ve come to Marquette today -- not only because it’s beautiful, and the people are reallynice -- which is true.  But I’ve come here because in the 21st century, it’s not just the bigcities where change is happening.  It’s also in towns like this where the jobs and businesses oftomorrow will take root, and where young and talented Americans can lead.  It’s towns likethis where our economic future will be won.   Now, in the short term, the best thing we can do to speed up economic growth is to makesure families and businesses have more money to spend, and that’s exactly what -- got a littleapplause there.  That’s exactly why we passed those tax cuts in December.  That’s what it’sdoing.  Because Democrats and Republicans came together, Americans’ paychecks will be alittle bigger this year and businesses will be able to write off their investments and companieswill grow and they’ll add workers.  But we’ve got more to do.   Our measure of success has to be whether every American who wants a job can find a job;whether this country is still the place where you can make it if you try.  In a world that’s moreconnected and more competitive, other nations look at this moment as their moment, theirturn to win the jobs and industries of our time.  I see things differently.  I see this asAmerica’s moment to win the future, so that the 21st century is the American century just likethe 20th century was.  Yes we can. But to do this, we’re going to have to up our game, Marquette.  We got to up our game.  Toattract the best jobs, the newest industries, we’re going to have to out-innovate, out-educate,out-build.  We’re going to have to out-hustle the rest of the world.  That means investing incutting-edge research and technology, like the new advanced battery manufacturing industrythat’s taking root right here in the state of Michigan.  It means investing in the skills andtraining of our people, just like it’s taking place at this university.  It means investing intransportation and communications networks that move goods and information as fast aspossible. And to make room for these investments, we’re going to have to cut whatever spending wecan do without.  We’ve got a real issue with debts and deficit, and so we’ve got to live withinour means.  And that means that we’ve got to cut out things that aren’t adding to growth andopportunity in order to invest in those things that are. And that’s why I’ve proposed that we freeze annual domestic spending for the next five years. That will reduce the deficit by more than 400 billion dollars over the next decade.  It willbring spending to the lowest share of our economy since Eisenhower was President.  That’s along time ago.  Even I wasn’t born then. 
  
So government has to do what American families do every day: live within our means.  Buteven as we do so, we can’t sacrifice our future.  I’ll just give you guys an analogy.  If you’retrying to cut back in your family, you might decide, we’re not going to go out to dinner sooften; maybe we’ll skip the vacation; we’re not going to remodel the kitchen.  But youwouldn’t stop saving for your child’s college education.  You wouldn’t stop saving for your ownretirement.  If your boiler was broken or your roof had a leak, you’d still go ahead and makethose investments.   Well, the same is true with our country.  We’ve got to cut out the equivalence of eating outand vacations.  I know there may be some restaurant owners here -- go eat at theirrestaurants -- but I’m just making a general point.  Even as we cut out the things we canafford to do without, we got a responsibility to invest in those areas that will have the biggestimpact on our future, and those things are innovation, education and infrastructure.   And that last area -- infrastructure -- is why I’ve come here today.  Connecting a country ofour size has never been easy.  Just imagine what Americans experienced when they fannedout from 13 colonies to settle a continent.  If you wanted to get from one coast to the other, itwould take you months; it would cost you a small fortune.  If you settled in the heartland, youwere an island, with no real market to sell your goods or buy what you needed.  You mighthave to wait until the traders came by before you stocked up. So we decided to build a railroad to span a continent -- one that would blast throughmountains of granite and use thousands of miles of steel, and put to work an army of citizensand immigrants to work.  It was an endeavor that would also require support of ourgovernment.  It didn’t just happen on its own.  As General William T. Sherman said, “UncleSam is the only giant I know who can grapple the subject.” So even as President Lincoln tried to hold the North and South together, he was determined tosee this railroad unite East and West.  And private companies joined the charge, racing oneanother to meet in the middle.  And eventually, a telephone operator -- a telegraph operatorsent out a simple message to the cheers of a waiting nation.  The telegraph just said: “Done.” Done.  Now, if he knew that we were still talking about it today, he might have come up withsomething more inspiring.
But overnight, the transcontinental railroad laid the way for a nationwide economy, not abunch of local economies, but a nationwide economy.  Suddenly, a cross-country trip was cutfrom months to days.  The cost to move goods and mail plummeted.  Cowboys drove cattle torailcars that whisked them back East.  Entrepreneurs could sell anything, anywhere.   After the railroad was completed, a newspaper proclaimed: “We are the youngest of peoples. But we are teaching the world to march forward.”  Teaching the world to march forward.   
  
That’s who we are.  We are a nation that has always been built to compete.  And that’s why,decades later, FDR set up the Rural Electrification Administration to help bring power to vastswaths of America that were still in darkness.  Companies said that building lines to ruralareas would be too costly.  I mean, big cities already had electricity.  But they said, it’s toocostly to go out into remote areas.  It’s too costly to come up into the Upper Peninsula.   So Americans in these towns went without refrigeration or running water.  If you wanted aglimpse of the larger world, your town might run a movie off a small diesel engine.  It mightnot even last the full film.   Once power lines were laid down, electricity flowed to farms across the country, transformingmillions of lives.  There’s a well-known story of a Texas family returning home the first nighttheir farmhouse was hooked up, and a woman thought it was on fire.  And her daughter said,“No, Mama, the lights are on.”  Think about that.  That wasn’t that long ago, and governmentwas there to help make sure that everybody -- everybody, not just some -- but everybody --not just those who folks could make an immediate profit off of -- but everybody had access toelectricity. So years later, as our nation grew by leaps and bounds, we realized that a patchwork systemof back roads and dirt paths couldn’t handle the biggest economy in the world.  So PresidentEisenhower helped make it possible to build an Interstate Highway System, and that, too,transformed the nation -- as much as the railways had. And finally, we could ship goods and services to places that the railroads didn’t reach.  Itmeant that we could live apart from where we worked.  We could travel.  We could seeAmerica.
Each of these achievements -- none of them just happened.  We chose to do them.  We choseto do big things.  And every American benefited -- not just from new conveniences.  Not justfrom the jobs created by laying down new lines or tracks or pavement.  We benefitedenormously from new economic growth -- from the scores of businesses that opened neareach town’s new train station, or new power line, or new off-ramp. So this is a new century, and we can’t expect tomorrow’s economy to take root usingyesterday’s infrastructure.  We got to think about what’s the next thing, what’s the next bigthing, and make sure that we’re at the forefront -- just like we were in the last century. Today, new companies are going to seek out the fastest, most reliable ways to move people,goods and information, whether they are in Shanghai or in Chicago.  So if we want new jobsand businesses here in America, we’ve got to have the best transportation system and thebest communication network in the world.  It’s like that movie, Field of Dreams:  If we build it,they will come.  But we’ve got to build it.  We’ve got to build it. 
  
Over the last two years, we’ve begun rebuilding for the 21st century.  This is a nationalproject that has meant thousands of jobs for the hard-hit construction industry.  And I’ve nowproposed redoubling these efforts.  We want to put more Americans to work repairingcrumbling bridges and roads.  Within 25 years, our goal is to have 80 percent of Americanswith access to high-speed rail, which could allow you to go to places in half the time it takesby car.  Within five years, we want to make it possible for businesses to put high-speedwireless services in reach of virtually every American. And that last part, high-speed wireless, is why I chose to come to Northern MichiganUniversity today. Now let me give you some context.  Today, more than 90 percent of homesin South Korea subscribe to high-speed broadband.  They just have better networks than wedo.  In America, the nation that created the Internet -- by the way, because of governmentinvestment; it didn’t just happen by itself magically -- because of government R&D, wecreated the Internet, but yet only 65 percent of households here in America can say the same. When it comes to high-speed Internet, the lights are still off in one-third of our households. One out of every three households in America don’t have that same access.  For millions ofAmericans, the railway hasn’t showed up yet. For our families and our businesses, high-speed wireless service, that’s the next train station;it’s the next off-ramp.  It’s how we’ll spark new innovation, new investment, new jobs.   And you know this here in Northern Michigan.  That’s why I showed up, in addition to it beingpretty and people being nice.  For decades now, this university has given a new laptop toevery incoming student.  Wi-Fi stretched across campus.  But if you lived off-campus, likemost students and teachers here, you were largely out of luck.  Broadband was often tooexpensive to afford.  And if you lived a bit further out of town, you were completely out ofluck, because broadband providers, they often won’t build networks where it’s not profitable,just like they wouldn’t build electrical lines where it wasn’t profitable. So this university tried something new.  You partnered with various companies to build a high-
speed, next-generation wireless network.  And you managed to install it with six people inonly four days without raising tuition.  Good job.  Good job, Mr. President.  By the way, if yougive me the name of these six people -- there’s a whole bunch of stuff in Washington I’d liketo see done in four days with six people. So today, this is one of America’s most connected universities, and enrollment is near thehighest it’s been in 30 years. And what’s more -- and this is what makes this special -- you told nearby towns that if theyallowed you to retrofit their towers with new equipment to expand your network, then theirschools, their first responders, their city governments could use it too.  And as a result, policeofficers can access crime databases in their cars.  And firefighters can download blueprints onthe way to a burning building.  And public works officials can save money by monitoringpumps and equipment remotely.   
  
And you’ve created new online learning opportunities for K-12 students as far as 30 milesaway, some of whom -- some of whom can’t always make it to school in a place that averages200 inches of snow a year. Now, some of these students don’t appreciate the end of school[snow] days.  I know Malia and Sasha get really excited about school [snow] days.  Of course,in Washington things shut down when there’s an inch of snow. But this technology is givingthem more opportunity.  It’s good for their education, it’s good for our economy.  In fact, Ijust came from a demonstration of online learning in action.  We were with Professor Lubigand he had plugged in Negaunee High School -- and Powell Township School in Big Bay.  So Ifelt like the guy in Star Trek.  I was being beamed around -- across the Upper Peninsula here. But it was remarkable to see the possibilities for these young people who are able to, let’ssay, do a chemistry experiment, and they can compare the results with kids in Boston. Or if there’s some learning tool or material they don’t have immediately accessible in theirschool, they can connect here to the university, and they’re able to tap into it.
It’s opening up an entire world to them.  And one of the young people who I was talking to,he talked about foreign policy and what we were seeing in places like Egyptian.  And he said,what’s amazing especially for us is that now we have a window to the entire world, and wecan start understanding other cultures and other places in ways that we could never dowithout this technology. For local businesses, broadband access is helping them grow and prosper and compete in aglobal economy.  In fact, Marquette has been rated one of the top five “eCities” in Michiganfor entrepreneurship.  That’s right. So here’s a great example, Getz’s Clothiers. The Getzesare here.  Where are the Getzes?  They’re around here somewhere.  There they are rightthere.
This is a third-generation, family-owned, Marquette institution.  They’ve occupied the samedowntown store for more than a century -- but with the help of broadband, they were recentlylisted as one of America’s 5,000 fastest-growing companies.  Now how did they pull that off? Obviously they’ve got great products, great service.  But what’s also true is online sales nowmake up more than two-thirds of their annual revenue.  Think about that.  You got adowntown department store; now two-thirds of its sales are online.  It can process more than1,000 orders a day, and its workforce has more than doubled.  So you’ve got a local businesswith a global footprint because of technology. Now, if you can do this in snowy U.P. -- we can do it all across America.  In fact, many placesalready are.  So in Wagner, South Dakota, patients can receive high-quality, lifesavingmedical care from a Sioux Falls specialist who can monitor their EKG and listen to theirbreathing -- from 100 miles away.  In Ten Sleep, Wyoming -- I love the name of that town,Ten Sleep -- it’s a town in Wyoming of 300 people.  A fiber-optic network allowed a companyto employ several hundred teachers who teach English to students in Asia over the Internet,24 hours a day.  You’ve all heard about outsourcing.  Well, this is “insourcing” -- whereoverseas work is done right here in the United States of America.
  
So we want to multiply these stories -- we want to multiply your story -- all over the country.We want to invest in the next generation of high-speed wireless coverage for 98 percent ofAmericans. This isn’t just about faster Internet or being able to find a friend on Facebook.  It’s aboutconnecting every corner of America to the digital age.  It’s about a rural community in Iowa orAlabama where farmers can monitor weather across the state and market across the globe. It’s about an entrepreneur on Main Street with a great idea she hopes to sell to the big city. It’s about every young person who no longer has to leave his hometown to seek newopportunity -- because opportunity is right there at his or her fingertips.
So to make this happen, we’re going to invest in research and development of emergingtechnologies and applications.  We’re going to accelerate breakthroughs in health andeducation and transportation, and deploy a new nationwide, interoperable wireless networkfor first responders -- making sure they’ve got the funding and the frequencies that they werepromised and that they need to keep us safe.  It’s important.  By selling private companiesthe rights to these airwaves, we won’t just encourage private investment and expand wirelessaccess; we’re actually going to bring in revenues that lower our deficits.
Now, access to high-speed Internet by itself won’t make a business more successful, or astudent smarter, or a citizen more informed.  That takes hard work.  It takes those latenights.  It takes hustle.  It takes that quintessentially American drive to be the best.  That’swhat’s the most important ingredient for our success. But we’ve always believed that we have a responsibility to guarantee all our people every toolnecessary for them to meet their full potential.  So if they’re willing to work hard, they cansucceed.  And in a 21st-century economy, that has never been more important.  EveryAmerican deserves access to the world’s information.  Every American deserves access to theglobal economy.  We have promised this for 15 years.  It’s time we delivered on that promise.It’s time we delivered on that promise. So connecting our people.  Competing with the rest of the world.  Living within our meanswithout sacrificing what’s required to win the future.  We can do all this because we’ve done itbefore. In 1960, at the height of his presidential campaign, JFK came to Michigan.  And it was amoment similar to this one. Other nations were doing their best to try to take our place at thetop.  And here in Michigan, he made it clear that if we wanted to keep from being knocked offour perch, there could only be one goal for the United States.  It could be summed up in oneword: “first.”  First.
  
“I do not mean first, but,” he said.  “I don’t mean first, when.  I don’t mean first, if.  I meanfirst -- period.”  And “The real question now,” he continued, “The real question,” he continued,“is whether we’re up to the task -- whether each and every one of us is willing to face thefacts, to bear the burdens, to provide the risks, and to meet our dangers.”  That was 50 yearsago.  But things haven’t changed in terms of what’s required to succeed. And we were up to the task then.  I believe we’re up to the task today.  Time and again,whether westward or skyward, with each rail and road that we’ve laid, in every community,we’ve connected with our own science and imagination, and we forged anew our faith that wecan do anything.  We do big things.  That’s who we are.  And that’s who we’re going to haveto be again -- a young nation that teaches the world to march forward. That’s what you’re doing up here in U.P.  That’s what you’re doing here at Northern MichiganUniversity.  That’s what we’re all going to do together in the months and years to come. Thank you.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.
