Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, my fellow Americans:
Today in America, a teacher spent extra time with a student who needed it, and did her partto lift America's graduation rate to its highest level in more than three decades.
An entrepreneur flipped on the lights in her tech startup, and did her part to add to the morethan eight million new jobs our businesses have created over the past four years. 
An autoworker fine-tuned some of the best, most fuel-efficient cars in the world, and did hispart to help America wean itself off foreign oil.
A farmer prepared for the spring after the strongest five-year stretch of farm exports in ourhistory.  A rural doctor gave a young child the first prescription to treat asthma that hismother could afford.  A man took the bus home from the graveyard shift, bone-tired butdreaming big dreams for his son.  And in tight-knit communities across America, fathers andmothers will tuck in their kids, put an arm around their spouse, remember fallen comrades,and give thanks for being home from a war that, after twelve long years, is finally coming toan end.
Tonight, this chamber speaks with one voice to the people we represent: it is you, ourcitizens, who make the state of our union strong.
  
Here are the results of your efforts:  The lowest unemployment rate in over five years.  Arebounding housing market.  A manufacturing sector that's adding jobs for the first time sincethe 1990s.  More oil produced at home than we buy from the rest of the world -- the first timethat's happened in nearly twenty years.  Our deficits -- cut by more than half.  And for thefirst time in over a decade, business leaders around the world have declared that China is nolonger the world's number one place to invest; America is.
That's why I believe this can be a breakthrough year for America.  After five years of grit anddetermined effort, the United States is better-positioned for the 21st century than any othernation on Earth.
The question for everyone in this chamber, running through every decision we make this year,is whether we are going to help or hinder this progress.  For several years now, this town hasbeen consumed by a rancorous argument over the proper size of the federal government.  It'san important debate -- one that dates back to our very founding.  But when that debateprevents us from carrying out even the most basic functions of our democracy -- when ourdifferences shut down government or threaten the full faith and credit of the United States --then we are not doing right by the American people.
As President, I'm committed to making Washington work better, and rebuilding the trust ofthe people who sent us here.  I believe most of you are, too.  Last month, thanks to the workof Democrats and Republicans, this Congress finally produced a budget that undoes some oflast year's severe cuts to priorities like education.  Nobody got everything they wanted, andwe can still do more to invest in this country's future while bringing down our deficit in abalanced way.  But the budget compromise should leave us freer to focus on creating newjobs, not creating new crises.
In the coming months, let's see where else we can make progress together.  Let's make this ayear of action.  That's what most Americans want -- for all of us in this chamber to focus ontheir lives, their hopes, their aspirations.  And what I believe unites the people of this nation,regardless of race or region or party, young or old, rich or poor, is the simple, profound beliefin opportunity for all -- the notion that if you work hard and take responsibility, you can getahead.
Let's face it: that belief has suffered some serious blows.  Over more than three decades,even before the Great Recession hit, massive shifts in technology and global competition hadeliminated a lot of good, middle-class jobs, and weakened the economic foundations thatfamilies depend on.
Today, after four years of economic growth, corporate profits and stock prices have rarelybeen higher, and those at the top have never done better.  But average wages have barelybudged.  Inequality has deepened.  Upward mobility has stalled.  The cold, hard fact is thateven in the midst of recovery, too many Americans are working more than ever just to get by-- let alone get ahead.  And too many still aren't working at all.
  
Our job is to reverse these trends.  It won't happen right away, and we won't agree oneverything.  But what I offer tonight is a set of concrete, practical proposals to speed upgrowth, strengthen the middle class, and build new ladders of opportunity into the middleclass.  Some require Congressional action, and I'm eager to work with all of you.  But Americadoes not stand still -- and neither will I.  So wherever and whenever I can take steps withoutlegislation to expand opportunity for more American families, that's what I'm going to do. 
As usual, our First Lady sets a good example.  Michelle's Let's Move partnership with schools,businesses, and local leaders has helped bring down childhood obesity rates for the first timein thirty years -- an achievement that will improve lives and reduce health care costs fordecades to come.  The Joining Forces alliance that Michelle and Jill Biden launched has alreadyencouraged employers to hire or train nearly 400,000 veterans and military spouses.  Takinga page from that playbook, the White House just organized a College Opportunity Summitwhere already, 150 universities, businesses, and nonprofits have made concrete commitmentsto reduce inequality in access to higher education -- and help every hardworking kid go tocollege and succeed when they get to campus.  Across the country, we're partnering withmayors, governors, and state legislatures on issues from homelessness to marriage equality.
The point is, there are millions of Americans outside Washington who are tired of stale politicalarguments, and are moving this country forward.  They believe, and I believe, that here inAmerica, our success should depend not on accident of birth, but the strength of our workethic and the scope of our dreams.  That's what drew our forebears here.  It's how thedaughter of a factory worker is CEO of America's largest automaker; how the son of abarkeeper is Speaker of the House; how the son of a single mom can be President of thegreatest nation on Earth. 
Opportunity is who we are.  And the defining project of our generation is to restore thatpromise.
We know where to start: the best measure of opportunity is access to a good job.  With theeconomy picking up speed, companies say they intend to hire more people this year.  Andover half of big manufacturers say they're thinking of insourcing jobs from abroad.
So let's make that decision easier for more companies.  Both Democrats and Republicans haveargued that our tax code is riddled with wasteful, complicated loopholes that punishbusinesses investing here, and reward companies that keep profits abroad.  Let's flip thatequation.  Let's work together to close those loopholes, end those incentives to ship jobsoverseas, and lower tax rates for businesses that create jobs here at home.
Moreover, we can take the money we save with this transition to tax reform to create jobsrebuilding our roads, upgrading our ports, unclogging our commutes -- because in today'sglobal economy, first-class jobs gravitate to first-class infrastructure.
  
We'll need Congress to protect more than three million jobs by finishing transportation andwaterways bills this summer.  But I will act on my own to slash bureaucracy and streamlinethe permitting process for key projects, so we can get more construction workers on the jobas fast as possible.
We also have the chance, right now, to beat other countries in the race for the next wave ofhigh-tech manufacturing jobs.  My administration has launched two hubs for high-techmanufacturing in Raleigh and Youngstown, where we've connected businesses to researchuniversities that can help America lead the world in advanced technologies.  Tonight, I'mannouncing we'll launch six more this year.  Bipartisan bills in both houses could double thenumber of these hubs and the jobs they create.  So get those bills to my desk and put moreAmericans back to work.
Let's do more to help the entrepreneurs and small business owners who create most new jobsin America.  Over the past five years, my administration has made more loans to smallbusiness owners than any other.  And when ninety-eight percent of our exporters are smallbusinesses, new trade partnerships with Europe and the Asia-Pacific will help them createmore jobs.  We need to work together on tools like bipartisan trade promotion authority toprotect our workers, protect our environment, and open new markets to new goods stamped"Made in the USA."  China and Europe aren't standing on the sidelines.  Neither should we.
We know that the nation that goes all-in on innovation today will own the global economytomorrow.  This is an edge America cannot surrender.  Federally-funded research helped leadto the ideas and inventions behind Google and smartphones.  That's why Congress shouldundo the damage done by last year's cuts to basic research so we can unleash the next greatAmerican discovery -- whether it's vaccines that stay ahead of drug-resistant bacteria, orpaper-thin material that's stronger than steel.  And let's pass a patent reform bill that allowsour businesses to stay focused on innovation, not costly, needless litigation.
Now, one of the biggest factors in bringing more jobs back is our commitment to Americanenergy.  The all-of-the-above energy strategy I announced a few years ago is working, andtoday, America is closer to energy independence than we've been in decades.
One of the reasons why is natural gas -- if extracted safely, it's the bridge fuel that can powerour economy with less of the carbon pollution that causes climate change.  Businesses plan toinvest almost $100 billion in new factories that use natural gas.  I'll cut red tape to help statesget those factories built, and this Congress can help by putting people to work building fuelingstations that shift more cars and trucks from foreign oil to American natural gas.  Myadministration will keep working with the industry to sustain production and job growth whilestrengthening protection of our air, our water, and our communities.  And while we're at it, I'lluse my authority to protect more of our pristine federal lands for future generations.
  
It's not just oil and natural gas production that's booming; we're becoming a global leader insolar, too.  Every four minutes, another American home or business goes solar; every panelpounded into place by a worker whose job can't be outsourced.  Let's continue that progresswith a smarter tax policy that stops giving $4 billion a year to fossil fuel industries that don'tneed it, so that we can invest more in fuels of the future that do.
And even as we've increased energy production, we've partnered with businesses, builders,and local communities to reduce the energy we consume.  When we rescued our automakers,for example, we worked with them to set higher fuel efficiency standards for our cars.  In thecoming months, I'll build on that success by setting new standards for our trucks, so we cankeep driving down oil imports and what we pay at the pump.
Taken together, our energy policy is creating jobs and leading to a cleaner, safer planet.  Overthe past eight years, the United States has reduced our total carbon pollution more than anyother nation on Earth.  But we have to act with more urgency -- because a changing climate isalready harming western communities struggling with drought, and coastal cities dealing withfloods.  That's why I directed my administration to work with states, utilities, and others to setnew standards on the amount of carbon pollution our power plants are allowed to dump intothe air.  The shift to a cleaner energy economy won't happen overnight, and it will requiretough choices along the way.  But the debate is settled.  Climate change is a fact.  And whenour children's children look us in the eye and ask if we did all we could to leave them a safer,more stable world, with new sources of energy, I want us to be able to say yes, we did.
Finally, if we are serious about economic growth, it is time to heed the call of businessleaders, labor leaders, faith leaders, and law enforcement -- and fix our broken immigrationsystem.  Republicans and Democrats in the Senate have acted.  I know that members of bothparties in the House want to do the same.  Independent economists say immigration reformwill grow our economy and shrink our deficits by almost $1 trillion in the next two decades. And for good reason: when people come here to fulfill their dreams -- to study, invent, andcontribute to our culture -- they make our country a more attractive place for businesses tolocate and create jobs for everyone.  So let's get immigration reform done this year.
The ideas I've outlined so far can speed up growth and create more jobs.  But in this rapidly-
changing economy, we have to make sure that every American has the skills to fill those jobs.
The good news is, we know how to do it.  Two years ago, as the auto industry came roaringback, Andra Rush opened up a manufacturing firm in Detroit.  She knew that Ford neededparts for the best-selling truck in America, and she knew how to make them.  She just neededthe workforce.  So she dialed up what we call an American Job Center -- places where folkscan walk in to get the help or training they need to find a new job, or better job.  She wasflooded with new workers.  And today, Detroit Manufacturing Systems has more than 700employees.
  
What Andra and her employees experienced is how it should be for every employer -- andevery job seeker.  So tonight, I've asked Vice President Biden to lead an across-the-boardreform of America's training programs to make sure they have one mission: train Americanswith the skills employers need, and match them to good jobs that need to be filled right now. That means more on-the-job training, and more apprenticeships that set a young worker onan upward trajectory for life.  It means connecting companies to community colleges that canhelp design training to fill their specific needs.  And if Congress wants to help, you canconcentrate funding on proven programs that connect more ready-to-work Americans withready-to-be-filled jobs.
I'm also convinced we can help Americans return to the workforce faster by reformingunemployment insurance so that it's more effective in today's economy.  But first, thisCongress needs to restore the unemployment insurance you just let expire for 1.6 millionpeople.
Let me tell you why.
Misty DeMars is a mother of two young boys. She'd been steadily employed since she was ateenager.  She put herself through college.  She'd never collected unemployment benefits.  InMay, she and her husband used their life savings to buy their first home.  A week later,budget cuts claimed the job she loved.  Last month, when their unemployment insurance wascut off, she sat down and wrote me a letter -- the kind I get every day.  "We are the face ofthe unemployment crisis," she wrote.  "I am not dependent on the government…Our countrydepends on people like us who build careers, contribute to society…care about ourneighbors…I am confident that in time I will find a job…I will pay my taxes, and we will raiseour children in their own home in the community we love.  Please give us this chance."
Congress, give these hardworking, responsible Americans that chance.  They need our help,but more important, this country needs them in the game.  That's why I've been asking CEOsto give more long-term unemployed workers a fair shot at that new job and new chance tosupport their families; this week, many will come to the White House to make thatcommitment real.  Tonight, I ask every business leader in America to join us and to do thesame -- because we are stronger when America fields a full team. 
Of course, it's not enough to train today's workforce.  We also have to prepare tomorrow'sworkforce, by guaranteeing every child access to a world-class education.
Estiven Rodriguez couldn't speak a word of English when he moved to New York City at agenine.  But last month, thanks to the support of great teachers and an innovative tutoringprogram, he led a march of his classmates -- through a crowd of cheering parents andneighbors -- from their high school to the post office, where they mailed off their collegeapplications.  And this son of a factory worker just found out he's going to college this fall.
  
Five years ago, we set out to change the odds for all our kids.  We worked with lenders toreform student loans, and today, more young people are earning college degrees than everbefore.  Race to the Top, with the help of governors from both parties, has helped states raiseexpectations and performance.  Teachers and principals in schools from Tennessee toWashington, D.C. are making big strides in preparing students with skills for the new economy-- problem solving, critical thinking, science, technology, engineering, and math.  Some of thischange is hard.  It requires everything from more challenging curriculums and moredemanding parents to better support for teachers and new ways to measure how well our kidsthink, not how well they can fill in a bubble on a test.  But it's worth it -- and it's working. 
The problem is we're still not reaching enough kids, and we're not reaching them in time. That has to change. 
Research shows that one of the best investments we can make in a child's life is high-qualityearly education.  Last year, I asked this Congress to help states make high-quality pre-Kavailable to every four year-old.  As a parent as well as a President, I repeat that requesttonight. But in the meantime, thirty states have raised pre-k funding on their own.  Theyknow we can't wait.  So just as we worked with states to reform our schools, this year, we'llinvest in new partnerships with states and communities across the country in a race to the topfor our youngest children.  And as Congress decides what it's going to do, I'm going to pulltogether a coalition of elected officials, business leaders, and philanthropists willing to helpmore kids access the high-quality pre-K they need.
Last year, I also pledged to connect 99 percent of our students to high-speed broadband overthe next four years.  Tonight, I can announce that with the support of the FCC and companieslike Apple, Microsoft, Sprint, and Verizon, we've got a down payment to start connecting morethan 15,000 schools and twenty million students over the next two years, without adding adime to the deficit. 
We're working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges and employers thatoffer the real-world education and hands-on training that can lead directly to a job andcareer.  We're shaking up our system of higher education to give parents more information,and colleges more incentives to offer better value, so that no middle-class kid is priced out ofa college education.  We're offering millions the opportunity to cap their monthly student loanpayments to ten percent of their income, and I want to work with Congress to see how we canhelp even more Americans who feel trapped by student loan debt.  And I'm reaching out tosome of America's leading foundations and corporations on a new initiative to help moreyoung men of color facing tough odds stay on track and reach their full potential.
The bottom line is, Michelle and I want every child to have the same chance this country gaveus.  But we know our opportunity agenda won't be complete -- and too many young peopleentering the workforce today will see the American Dream as an empty promise -- unless wedo more to make sure our economy honors the dignity of work, and hard work pays off forevery single American. 
  
Today, women make up about half our workforce.  But they still make 77 cents for everydollar a man earns.  That is wrong, and in 2014, it's an embarrassment. A woman deservesequal pay for equal work.  She deserves to have a baby without sacrificing her job.  A motherdeserves a day off to care for a sick child or sick parent without running into hardship -- andyou know what, a father does, too.  It's time to do away with workplace policies that belong ina "Mad Men" episode.  This year, let's all come together -- Congress, the White House, andbusinesses from Wall Street to Main Street -- to give every woman the opportunity shedeserves.  Because I firmly believe when women succeed, America succeeds.
Now, women hold a majority of lower-wage jobs -- but they're not the only ones stifled bystagnant wages.  Americans understand that some people will earn more than others, and wedon't resent those who, by virtue of their efforts, achieve incredible success.  But Americansoverwhelmingly agree that no one who works full time should ever have to raise a family inpoverty.
In the year since I asked this Congress to raise the minimum wage, five states have passedlaws to raise theirs.  Many businesses have done it on their own.  Nick Chute is here tonightwith his boss, John Soranno.  John's an owner of Punch Pizza in Minneapolis, and Nick helpsmake the dough.  Only now he makes more of it: John just gave his employees a raise, to tenbucks an hour -- a decision that eased their financial stress and boosted their morale.
Tonight, I ask more of America's business leaders to follow John's lead and do what you canto raise your employees' wages.  To every mayor, governor, and state legislator in America, Isay, you don't have to wait for Congress to act; Americans will support you if you take thison.  And as a chief executive, I intend to lead by example. Profitable corporations like Costcosee higher wages as the smart way to boost productivity and reduce turnover. We should too. In the coming weeks, I will issue an Executive Order requiring federal contractors to pay theirfederally-funded employees a fair wage of at least $10.10 an hour -- because if you cook ourtroops' meals or wash their dishes, you shouldn't have to live in poverty.
Of course, to reach millions more, Congress needs to get on board. Today, the federalminimum wage is worth about twenty percent less than it was when Ronald Reagan first stoodhere.  Tom Harkin and George Miller have a bill to fix that by lifting the minimum wage to$10.10.  This will help families.  It will give businesses customers with more money to spend. It doesn't involve any new bureaucratic program.  So join the rest of the country.  Say yes. Give America a raise.
There are other steps we can take to help families make ends meet, and few are moreeffective at reducing inequality and helping families pull themselves up through hard workthan the Earned Income Tax Credit.  Right now, it helps about half of all parents at somepoint.  But I agree with Republicans like Senator Rubio that it doesn't do enough for singleworkers who don't have kids.  So let's work together to strengthen the credit, reward work,and help more Americans get ahead.
  
Let's do more to help Americans save for retirement. Today, most workers don't have apension.  A Social Security check often isn't enough on its own.  And while the stock markethas doubled over the last five years, that doesn't help folks who don't have 401ks.  That'swhy, tomorrow, I will direct the Treasury to create a new way for working Americans to starttheir own retirement savings: MyRA. It's a new savings bond that encourages folks to build anest egg.  MyRA guarantees a decent return with no risk of losing what you put in.  And if thisCongress wants to help, work with me to fix an upside-down tax code that gives big taxbreaks to help the wealthy save, but does little to nothing for middle-class Americans.  Offerevery American access to an automatic IRA on the job, so they can save at work just likeeveryone in this chamber can.  And since the most important investment many families makeis their home, send me legislation that protects taxpayers from footing the bill for a housingcrisis ever again, and keeps the dream of homeownership alive for future generations ofAmericans.
One last point on financial security.  For decades, few things exposed hard-working families toeconomic hardship more than a broken health care system.  And in case you haven't heard,we're in the process of fixing that.
A pre-existing condition used to mean that someone like Amanda Shelley, a physicianassistant and single mom from Arizona, couldn't get health insurance.  But on January 1st, shegot covered.  On January 3rd, she felt a sharp pain.  On January 6th, she had emergencysurgery.  Just one week earlier, Amanda said, that surgery would've meant bankruptcy.
That's what health insurance reform is all about -- the peace of mind that if misfortunestrikes, you don't have to lose everything. 
Already, because of the Affordable Care Act, more than three million Americans under age 26have gained coverage under their parents' plans.
More than nine million Americans have signed up for private health insurance or Medicaidcoverage.
And here's another number: zero.  Because of this law, no American can ever again bedropped or denied coverage for a preexisting condition like asthma, back pain, or cancer. Nowoman can ever be charged more just because she's a woman.  And we did all this whileadding years to Medicare's finances, keeping Medicare premiums flat, and loweringprescription costs for millions of seniors.
Now, I don't expect to convince my Republican friends on the merits of this law.  But I knowthat the American people aren't interested in refighting old battles.  So again, if you havespecific plans to cut costs, cover more people, and increase choice -- tell America what you'ddo differently.  Let's see if the numbers add up.
  
But let's not have another forty-something votes to repeal a law that's already helping millionsof Americans like Amanda.  The first forty were plenty.  We got it.  We all owe it to theAmerican people to say what we're for, not just what we're against. 
And if you want to know the real impact this law is having, just talk to Governor SteveBeshear of Kentucky, who's here tonight.  Kentucky's not the most liberal part of the country,but he's like a man possessed when it comes to covering his commonwealth's families.  "Theyare our friends and neighbors," he said.  "They are people we shop and go to churchwith…farmers out on the tractors…grocery clerks…they are people who go to work everymorning praying they don't get sick.  No one deserves to live that way." 
Steve's right.  That's why, tonight, I ask every American who knows someone without healthinsurance to help them get covered by March 31st.  Moms, get on your kids to sign up.  Kids,call your mom and walk her through the application.  It will give her some peace of mind --plus, she'll appreciate hearing from you. 
After all, that's the spirit that has always moved this nation forward.  It's the spirit ofcitizenship -- the recognition that through hard work and responsibility, we can pursue ourindividual dreams, but still come together as one American family to make sure the nextgeneration can pursue its dreams as well.
Citizenship means standing up for everyone's right to vote.  Last year, part of the VotingRights Act was weakened.  But conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats are workingtogether to strengthen it; and the bipartisan commission I appointed last year has offeredreforms so that no one has to wait more than a half hour to vote.  Let's support these efforts. It should be the power of our vote, not the size of our bank account, that drives ourdemocracy.
Citizenship means standing up for the lives that gun violence steals from us each day.  I haveseen the courage of parents, students, pastors, and police officers all over this country whosay "we are not afraid," and I intend to keep trying, with or without Congress, to help stopmore tragedies from visiting innocent Americans in our movie theaters, shopping malls, orschools like Sandy Hook.
Citizenship demands a sense of common cause; participation in the hard work of self-
government; an obligation to serve to our communities.  And I know this chamber agrees thatfew Americans give more to their country than our diplomats and the men and women of theUnited States Armed Forces.
Tonight, because of the extraordinary troops and civilians who risk and lay down their lives tokeep us free, the United States is more secure.  When I took office, nearly 180,000 Americanswere serving in Iraq and Afghanistan.
  
Today, all our troops are out of Iraq.  More than 60,000 of our troops have already comehome from Afghanistan.  With Afghan forces now in the lead for their own security, our troopshave moved to a support role. Together with our allies, we will complete our mission there bythe end of this year, and America's longest war will finally be over.
After 2014, we will support a unified Afghanistan as it takes responsibility for its own future. If the Afghan government signs a security agreement that we have negotiated, a small forceof Americans could remain in Afghanistan with NATO allies to carry out two narrow missions:training and assisting Afghan forces, and counterterrorism operations to pursue any remnantsof al Qaeda.  For while our relationship with Afghanistan will change, one thing will not: ourresolve that terrorists do not launch attacks against our country.
The fact is, that danger remains.  While we have put al Qaeda's core leadership on a path todefeat, the threat has evolved, as al Qaeda affiliates and other extremists take root indifferent parts of the world. In Yemen, Somalia, Iraq, and Mali, we have to keep working withpartners to disrupt and disable these networks. In Syria, we'll support the opposition thatrejects  the agenda of terrorist networks. Here at home, we'll keep strengthening ourdefenses, and combat new threats like cyberattacks.  And as we reform our defense budget,we have to keep faith with our men and women in uniform, and invest in the capabilities theyneed to succeed in future missions.
We have to remain vigilant.  But I strongly believe our leadership and our security cannotdepend on our military alone. As Commander-in-Chief, I have used force when needed toprotect the American people, and I will never hesitate to do so as long as I hold this office. But I will not send our troops into harm's way unless it's truly necessary; nor will I allow oursons and daughters to be mired in open-ended conflicts.  We must fight the battles that needto be fought, not those that terrorists prefer from us -- large-scale deployments that drain ourstrength and may ultimately feed extremism.
So, even as we aggressively pursue terrorist networks -- through more targeted efforts andby building the capacity of our foreign partners -- America must move off a permanent warfooting.  That's why I've imposed prudent limits on the use of drones -- for we will not besafer if people abroad believe we strike within their countries without regard for theconsequence.  That's why, working with this Congress, I will reform our surveillance programs-- because the vital work of our intelligence community depends on public confidence, hereand abroad, that the privacy of ordinary people is not being violated.  And with the Afghanwar ending, this needs to be the year Congress lifts the remaining restrictions on detaineetransfers and we close the prison at Guantanamo Bay -- because we counter terrorism notjust through intelligence and military action, but by remaining true to our Constitutionalideals, and setting an example for the rest of the world.
  
You see, in a world of complex threats, our security and leadership depends on all elements ofour power -- including strong and principled diplomacy.  American diplomacy has rallied morethan fifty countries to prevent nuclear materials from falling into the wrong hands, andallowed us to reduce our own reliance on Cold War stockpiles.  American diplomacy, backedby the threat of force, is why Syria's chemical weapons are being eliminated, and we willcontinue to work with the international community to usher in the future the Syrian peopledeserve -- a future free of dictatorship, terror and fear. As we speak, American diplomacy issupporting Israelis and Palestinians as they engage in difficult but necessary talks to end theconflict there; to achieve dignity and an independent state for Palestinians, and lasting peaceand security for the State of Israel -- a Jewish state that knows America will always be at theirside.
And it is American diplomacy, backed by pressure, that has halted the progress of Iran'snuclear program -- and rolled parts of that program back -- for the very first time in adecade.  As we gather here tonight, Iran has begun to eliminate its stockpile of higher levelsof enriched uranium.  It is not installing advanced centrifuges.  Unprecedented inspectionshelp the world verify, every day, that Iran is not building a bomb.  And with our allies andpartners, we're engaged in negotiations to see if we can peacefully achieve a goal we allshare: preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
These negotiations will be difficult.  They may not succeed.  We are clear-eyed about Iran'ssupport for terrorist organizations like Hezbollah, which threaten our allies; and the mistrustbetween our nations cannot be wished away.  But these negotiations do not rely on trust; anylong-term deal we agree to must be based on verifiable action that convinces us and theinternational community that Iran is not building a nuclear bomb.  If John F. Kennedy andRonald Reagan could negotiate with the Soviet Union, then surely a strong and confidentAmerica can negotiate with less powerful adversaries today.
The sanctions that we put in place helped make this opportunity possible.  But let me beclear: if this Congress sends me a new sanctions bill now that threatens to derail these talks, Iwill veto it.  For the sake of our national security, we must give diplomacy a chance tosucceed.  If Iran's leaders do not seize this opportunity, then I will be the first to call for moresanctions, and stand ready to exercise all options to make sure Iran does not build a nuclearweapon.  But if Iran's leaders do seize the chance, then Iran could take an important step torejoin the community of nations, and we will have resolved one of the leading securitychallenges of our time without the risks of war.
Finally, let's remember that our leadership is defined not just by our defense against threats,but by the enormous opportunities to do good and promote understanding around the globe --to forge greater cooperation, to expand new markets, to free people from fear and want.  Andno one is better positioned to take advantage of those opportunities than America. 
  
Our alliance with Europe remains the strongest the world has ever known.  From Tunisia toBurma, we're supporting those who are willing to do the hard work of building democracy.  InUkraine, we stand for the principle that all people have the right to express themselves freelyand peacefully, and have a say in their country's future.  Across Africa, we're bringingtogether businesses and governments to double access to electricity and help end extremepoverty.  In the Americas, we are building new ties of commerce, but we're also expandingcultural and educational exchanges among young people.  And we will continue to focus onthe Asia-Pacific, where we support our allies, shape a future of greater security andprosperity, and extend a hand to those devastated by disaster -- as we did in the Philippines,when our Marines and civilians rushed to aid those battered by a typhoon, and were greetedwith words like, "We will never forget your kindness" and "God bless America!"
We do these things because they help promote our long-term security.  And we do thembecause we believe in the inherent dignity and equality of every human being, regardless ofrace or religion, creed or sexual orientation.
And next week, the world will see one expression of that commitment -- when Team USAmarches the red, white, and blue into the Olympic Stadium -- and brings home the gold.
My fellow Americans, no other country in the world does what we do.  On every issue, theworld turns to us, not simply because of the size of our economy or our military might -- butbecause of the ideals we stand for, and the burdens we bear to advance them.
No one knows this better than those who serve in uniform.  As this time of war draws to aclose, a new generation of heroes returns to civilian life.  We'll keep slashing that backlog soour veterans receive the benefits they've earned, and our wounded warriors receive the healthcare -- including the mental health care -- that they need.  We'll keep working to help all ourveterans translate their skills and leadership into jobs here at home.  And we all continue tojoin forces to honor and support our remarkable military families.
Let me tell you about one of those families I've come to know.
I first met Cory Remsburg, a proud Army Ranger, at Omaha Beach on the 65th anniversary ofD-Day.
Along with some of his fellow Rangers, he walked me through the program -- a strong,impressive young man, with an easy manner, sharp as a tack.  We joked around, and tookpictures, and I told him to stay in touch.
A few months later, on his tenth deployment, Cory was nearly killed by a massive roadsidebomb in Afghanistan. His comrades found him in a canal, face down, underwater, shrapnel inhis brain. 
  
For months, he lay in a coma.  The next time I met him, in the hospital, he couldn't speak; hecould barely move.  Over the years, he's endured dozens of surgeries and procedures, andhours of grueling rehab every day. 
Even now, Cory is still blind in one eye.  He still struggles on his left side.  But slowly, steadily,with the support of caregivers like his dad Craig, and the community around him, Cory hasgrown stronger. Day by day, he's learned to speak again and stand again and walk again --and he's working toward the day when he can serve his country again. 
"My recovery has not been easy," he says. "Nothing in life that's worth anything is easy." 
Cory is here tonight.  And like the Army he loves, like the America he serves, Sergeant FirstClass Cory Remsburg never gives up, and he does not quit.
                  
My fellow Americans, men and women like Cory remind us that America has never comeeasy.  Our freedom, our democracy, has never been easy.  Sometimes we stumble; we makemistakes; we get frustrated or discouraged.  But for more than two hundred years, we haveput those things aside and placed our collective shoulder to the wheel of progress -- to createand build and expand the possibilities of individual achievement; to free other nations fromtyranny and fear; to promote justice, and fairness, and equality under the law, so that thewords set to paper by our founders are made real for every citizen.
  
The America we want for our kids -- a rising America where honest work is plentiful andcommunities are strong; where prosperity is widely shared and opportunity for all lets us goas far as our dreams and toil will take us -- none of it is easy.  But if we work together; if wesummon what is best in us, with our feet planted firmly in today but our eyes cast towardstomorrow -- I know it's within our reach. 
Believe it.
God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
