Thank you very much.
Let me begin by thanking Dr. Jared Cohon, and the entire Carnegie Mellon community, forwelcoming me once again, and for the terrific work that he and the administration, faculty andstaff do here each and every day.
I also want to acknowledge your outstanding mayor -- who doesn’t look any older than thelast time I saw him -- Mayor Luke Ravenstahl.  There he is, right there.
It is great to be back at Carnegie Mellon, and in the beautiful city of Pittsburgh.  I love visitinga good sports town.  Last year, I stole Dan Rooney to serve as my ambassador to Ireland.  Tomake it up, I invited both the Steelers and the Penguins to the White House to celebrate theirchampionships.  Seeing how the Blackhawks are headed to Philly tonight with a 2-0 lead inthe Stanley Cup Finals, I'm just glad that we're on this side of the state.
I noticed a couple of people said they were rooting for the Blackhawks, which tells mesomething about the rivalry between Pittsburgh and Philly.
Of course, we meet here at an incredibly difficult time for America.  Among other things, it’s atime when the worst environmental disaster of its kind in our nation’s history is threateningthe Gulf Coast and the people who live there.  Right now, stopping this oil spill and containingits damage is necessarily the top priority not just of my Administration but I think of the entirecountry.  And we’re waging this battle every minute of every day.
  
But at the same time, we’re continuing our efforts to recover and rebuild from an economicdisaster that has touched the lives of nearly every American.  That’s what I want to talk abouttoday -- the state of our economy, the future we must seize, and the path we chose to getthere.
It has now been a little over 16 months since I took office amid one of the worst economicstorms in our history.  And to navigate that storm, my Administration was forced to take somedramatic and unpopular steps.  These steps have succeeded in breaking the freefall.  We’reagain moving in the right direction.
An economy that was shrinking at an alarming rate when I became President has now beengrowing for three consecutive quarters.  After losing an average of 750,000 jobs a monthduring the winter of last year, we’ve now added jobs for five of the last six months, and weexpect to see strong job growth in Friday’s report.  The taxpayer money it cost to shore upthe financial sector and the auto industry, that's being repaid.  And both GM and Chrysler areadding shifts and operating at a profit. So, despite temporary setbacks, uncertain worldevents, and the resulting ups and downs of the market, this economy is getting stronger bythe day.
Now, that doesn’t mean this recession is by any means over for the millions of Americans whoare still looking for a job or a way to pay the bills.  Not by a long shot.  The devastationcreated by the deepest downturn since the Great Depression has hit people and communitiesacross our country very hard.  And it’s not going to be a real recovery until people can feel itin their own lives.
In the immediate future, this means doing whatever is necessary to keep the recovery goingand to spur job growth.  But in the long term, it means recognizing that for a lot of middle-
class families -- for entire communities, in some case -- a sense of economic security hasbeen missing since long before the recession began.
Over the last decade, these families saw their income decline.  They saw the cost of thingslike health care and college tuition reach record highs.  They lived through a so-calledeconomic “expansion” that generated slower job growth than at any prior expansion sinceWorld War II.  Some people have called the last 10 years “the lost decade.”
So the anxiety that’s out there today isn’t new.  The recession has certainly made it worse,but that feeling of not being in control of your own economic future -- that sense that theAmerican Dream might slowly be slipping away -- that’s been around for some time now.  Andfor better or for worse, our generation of Americans has been buffeted by tremendous forcesof economic change.  Long gone are the days when a high school diploma could guarantee ajob at a local factory -- not when so many of those factories had moved overseas.  Pittsburgh,a city that once was defined by the steel industry, knows this better than just about anybody. And today, the ability of jobs and entire industries to relocate where there’s skilled workersand an Internet connection has forced America to compete like never before.
  
From China to India to Europe, other nations have already realized this.  They’re putting agreater emphasis on math and science, and demanding more from their students.  Somecountries are building high-speed railroads and expanding broadband access. They’re makingserious investments in technology and clean energy because they want to win the competitionfor those jobs.
So we can’t afford to stand pat while the world races by.  The United States of America did notbecome the most prosperous nation on Earth by sheer luck or happenstance.  We got herebecause each time a generation of Americans has faced a changing world, we have changedwith it.  We have not feared our future; we have shaped it.  America does not stand still; wemove forward.
And that's why I’ve said that as we emerge from this recession, we can’t afford to return tothe pre-crisis status quo.  We can’t go back to an economy that was too dependent on bubblesand debt and financial speculation.  We can’t accept economic growth that leaves the middleclass owing more and making less.  We have to build a new and stronger foundation forgrowth and prosperity -- and that’s exactly what we’ve been doing for the last 16 months.
It’s a foundation based on investments in our people and their future; investments in the skillsand education we need to compete; investments in a 21st century infrastructure for America,from high-speed railroads to high-speed Internet; investments in research and technology,like clean energy, that can lead to new jobs and new exports and new industries.
This new foundation is also based on reforms that will make our economy stronger and ourbusinesses more competitive -- reforms that will make health care cheaper, our financialsystem more secure, and our government less burdened with debt.
In a global economy, we can’t pursue this agenda in a vacuum.  At the height of the financialcrisis, the coordinated action we took with the nations of the G20 prevented a globaldepression and helped restore worldwide growth.  And as we’ve recently witnessed in Europe,economic difficulties in one part of the world can affect everybody else.  And that’s why wehave to keep on working with the nations of the G20 to pursue more balanced growth.  That’swhy we need to coordinate financial reform with other nations so that we avoid a global raceto the bottom.  It’s why we need to open new markets and meet the goal of my NationalExport Initiative:  to double our exports over the next five years.  And it’s why we need toensure that our competitors play fair and our agreements are enforced.  This, too, is part ofbuilding a new foundation.
Now, some of you may have noticed that we have been building this foundation without muchhelp from our friends in the other party.  From our efforts to rescue the economy, to healthinsurance reform, to financial reform, most have sat on the sidelines and shouted from thebleachers.  They said no to tax cuts for small businesses; no to tax credits for college tuition;no to investments in clean energy.  They said no to protecting patients from insurancecompanies and consumers from big banks.
  
And some of this, of course, is just politics.  Before I was even inaugurated, the congressionalleaders of the other party got together and made a calculation that if I failed, they’d win. Sowhen I went to meet with them about the need for a Recovery Act, in the midst of crisis, theyannounced they were against it before I even arrived at the meeting.  Before we even had ahealth care bill, a Republican senator actually said, “If we’re able to stop Obama on this, it willbe his Waterloo.  It will break him.”  So those weren’t very hopeful signs.
But to be fair, a good deal of the other party’s opposition to our agenda has also been rootedin their sincere and fundamental belief about the role of government.  It’s a belief thatgovernment has little or no role to play in helping this nation meet our collective challenges. It’s an agenda that basically offers two answers to every problem we face: more tax breaksfor the wealthy and fewer rules for corporations.
The last Administration called this recycled idea “the Ownership Society.”  But what itessentially means is that everyone is on their own.  No matter how hard you work, if yourpaycheck isn’t enough to pay for college or health care or childcare, well, you’re on your own. If misfortune causes you to lose your job or your home, you’re on your own.  And if you’re aWall Street bank or an insurance company or an oil company, you pretty much get to play byyour own rules, regardless of the consequences for everybody else.
Now, I’ve never believed that government has all the answers.  Government cannot andshould not replace businesses as the true engine of growth and job creation.  Governmentcan’t instill good values and a sense of responsibility in our children.  That's a parent’s job. Too much government can deprive us of choice and burden us with debt.  Poorly designedregulations can choke off competition and the capital that businesses need to thrive.
I understand these arguments.  And it’s reflected in my policies.  After all, one-third of theRecovery Act we designed was made up of tax cuts for families and small businesses.  Andwhen you think back to the health care debate, despite calls for a single-payer, government-
run health care plan, we passed reform that maintains our system of private health insurance.
But I also understand that throughout our nation’s history, we have balanced the threat ofoverreaching government against the dangers of an unfettered market.  We've provided abasic safety net, because any one of us might experience hardship at some time in our livesand may need some help getting back on our feet.  And we've recognized that there havebeen times when only government has been able to do what individuals couldn't do andcorporations wouldn't do.
That's how we have railroads and highways, public schools and police forces.  That's howwe've made possible scientific research that has led to medical breakthroughs like the vaccinefor Hepatitis B, and technological wonders like GPS.  That's how we have Social Security and aminimum wage, and laws to protect the food we eat and the water we drink and the air thatwe breathe.  That’s how we have rules to ensure that mines are safe and, yes, that oilcompanies pay for the spills that they cause.
  
Now, there have always been those who’ve said no to such protections; no to suchinvestments.  There were accusations that Social Security would lead to socialism, and thatMedicare was a government takeover.  There were bankers who claimed the creation offederal deposit insurance would destroy the industry.  And there were automakers who arguedthat installing seatbelts was unnecessary and unaffordable.  There were skeptics who thoughtthat cleaning our water and our air would bankrupt our entire economy.  And all of theseclaims proved false.  All of these reforms led to greater security and greater prosperity for ourpeople and our economy.
So what was true then is true today.  As November approaches, leaders in the other party willcampaign furiously on the same economic arguments they’ve been making for decades. Fortunately, we don't have to look back too many years to see how their agenda turns out. For much of the last 10 years we've tried it their way.  They gave us tax cuts that weren’t paidfor to millionaires who didn’t need them.  They gutted regulations and put industry insiders incharge of industry oversight.  They shortchanged investments in clean energy and education,in research and technology.  And despite all their current moralizing about the need to curbspending, this is the same crowd who took the record $237 billion surplus that PresidentClinton left them and turned it into a record $1.3 trillion deficit.
So we know where those ideas lead us.  And now we have a choice as a nation.  We canreturn to the failed economic policies of the past, or we can keep building a stronger future.We can go backward, or we can keep moving forward.  And I don't know about you, but Iwant to move forward.  I think America wants to move forward.
Now, the first step in building a new foundation that allows us to move forward has been toaddress the costs and risks that have made our economy less competitive -- outdatedregulations, crushing health care costs, and a growing debt.
To start with, we can't compete as a nation if the irresponsibility of a few folks on Wall Streetcan bring our entire economy to its knees.  That's why we're on the verge of passing the mostsweeping financial reform since the Great Depression.  It’s a reform that will help preventanother AIG.  It will end taxpayer-funded bank bailouts.  It contains the strongest consumerprotections in history -- protections that will empower Americans with the clear and conciseinformation they need before signing up for a credit card or taking out a mortgage.
Financial reform will not guard against every instance of greed and irresponsibility on WallStreet.  But it will enshrine a new principle in our financial system:  From now on, instead ofcompeting to see who can come up with the cleverest scheme to make the quickest buck,financial institutions will compete to see who can make the better product and the betterservice.  And that's a competition that benefits Wall Street and Main Street.  That’s why weneed to get this legislation done.  It’s why we can’t afford to go back; we have to moveforward.
  
We also know we can’t compete in a global economy if our citizens are forced to spend moreand more of their income on medical bills; if our businesses are forced to choose betweenhealth care and hiring; if state and federal budgets are weighed down with skyrocketinghealth care costs.  That’s why we finally passed health insurance reform.
Now, let’s be clear.  The costs of health care are not going to come down overnight justbecause legislation passed, and in an ever-changing industry like health care, we’re going tocontinuously need to apply more cost-cutting measures as the years go by.  But once thisreform is in full effect, middle-class families will pay less for their health care, and the worstpractices of the insurance industry will end.  People with preexisting medical conditions will nolonger be excluded from coverage.  People who become seriously ill will no longer be thrownoff their coverage for reasons contrived by the insurance company.  Taxpayers will no longerhave to pay -- in the form of higher premiums -- for trips to the ER by uninsured Americans. Businesses will get help with their health care costs.  In fact, small businesses are alreadylearning they’re eligible for tax credits to cover their workers this year.  And with less wasteand greater efficiency in the system, this reform will do more to bring down the deficit thanany step we have taken in more than a decade.
The other party has staked their claim this November on repealing these health insurancereforms instead of making them work.  They want to go back.  We need to move forward.
Making health care more cost-efficient is critical, because it’s also true that we cannot becompetitive as a nation if we remain dragged down by our growing debt.  So let me talk aboutdebt just for a second.
By the time I took office, we had a one-year deficit of over $1 trillion and projected deficits of$8 trillion over the next decade.  Most of this was the result of not paying for two major taxcuts skewed to the wealthy, and a worthy but expensive prescription drug program thatwasn’t paid for.  I always find it interesting that the same people who participated in thesedecisions are the ones who now charge our Administration with fiscal irresponsibility.
And the truth is if I had taken office in ordinary times, I would have liked nothing more thanto start bringing down the deficits that they created.  But we took office amid a crisis, and theeffects of the recession put a $3 trillion hole in our budget before I even walked through thedoor.  Additionally, the steps that we had to take to save the economy from depressiontemporarily added more to the deficit -- by about $1 trillion.  Of course, if we had spiraled intoa depression, our deficits and debt levels would be much worse.
Now, the economy is still fragile, so we can’t put on the brakes too quickly.  We have to dowhat it takes to ensure a strong recovery.  A growing economy will unquestionably improveour fiscal health, as will the steps we take in the short-term to put Americans back to work.
  
And that’s why I signed a bill that will provide tax cuts for small businesses that hireunemployed workers.  That's why I’ve urged Congress to pass a small business lending fundso that small businesses can get the credit they need to create jobs and grow.  That's why Ibelieve it’s critical we extend unemployment insurance for several more months, so thatAmericans who’ve been laid off through no fault of their own get the support they need toprovide for their families and can maintain their health insurance until they’re rehired.  Andwe have to work with state and local governments to make sure they have the resources toprevent the likely layoffs of hundreds of thousands of public school teachers across thecountry over the next few months.
But as we look ahead, we can’t lose sight of the urgent need to get our fiscal house in order. There are four key components to putting our budget on a sustainable path.  Maintainingeconomic growth is number one.  Health care reform is number two. The third component isthe belt-tightening steps I’ve already outlined to reduce our deficit by $1 trillion.
Starting in 2011, we will enact a three-year freeze on all discretionary spending outside ofnational security -- something that was never enacted in the last Administration.  We willallow the tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans to expire.  We’ve gone through the budget,line by line, and identified more than 120 programs for elimination.  We’ve restored a simplebudgeting rule that every family and business understands called pay-as-you-go. And we willcharge the largest Wall Street firms a fee to repay the American people for rescuing themduring the financial crisis -- a fee that will bring down the deficit by $90 billion -- a fee thatwill bring down the deficit by $90 billion over the next decade.  By the way, that $90 billionrepresents about one-eighth of the amount these banks will pay out in bonuses over the sametime period in time.
Now, finally, the fourth component in improving our fiscal health is the bipartisan FiscalCommission that I’ve established that will provide a specific set of solutions by the fall to dealwith our medium- and long-term deficit.  And I have to warn you this will not be easy.  I knowthat some like to make the argument that if we would just eliminate pork barrel projects andforeign aid, we could eliminate our deficit.  Turns out such spending makes up just 3 percentof our deficit.  You combine all foreign aid and all earmarks -- that’s 3 percent of our budget. So meeting the deficit challenge will require some very difficult decisions about the largelypopular programs that make up the other 97 percent.  It means we’ll have to sort through ourpriorities and figure out what programs that we can do without.
On this point, I strongly agree with my friends in the other party.  What I don’t agree with isthe notion that we should also sacrifice critical investments in our people and our future.  Youknow, if you’re a family who’s tightening your belt, you will definitely sacrifice going out todinner, but you’re not going to sacrifice saving for your child’s college education.  It’s preciselyour investments in education and innovation that will make America more competitive in the21st century.  And we can’t go back; we’ve got to move forward.
  
That’s why I’ve made education reform a top priority -- because countries that out-educate ustoday will out-compete us tomorrow.  And so we want every citizen to have the skills andtraining they need in a global economy -- from the day that you’re born through whatevercareer you may choose.
Last year, we launched a national competition to improve our schools based on a simple idea: Instead of funding the status quo, we will only invest in reform -- reform that raises studentachievement, that inspires students to excel in math and science, and turns around failingschools that steal the future of too many young Americans.
And to achieve my goal of ensuring America once more has the highest proportion of collegegraduates in the world by 2020, we passed a law that will make college more affordable byending the unnecessary taxpayer subsidies that go to financial institutions for student loans. That means we’re saving billions of dollars that will go directly to students, including studentsright here at Carnegie Mellon.
It’s a bill that will also revitalize our community colleges, which are a career pathway to thechildren of so many working families.
In addition to training our workers for the jobs of the future, we’re also investing in theinnovation that will create those jobs here in America -- the research, the technology, theinfrastructure that will secure our economic future.
Right now, as we speak, the Recovery Act is putting Americans to work building a 21stcentury America.  There’s no reason China should have the fastest trains or that ruralPennsylvania should be without high-speed Internet access.  We’ve got to make thoseinvestments.  From the first railroads to the Interstate Highway System, this nation hasalways been built to compete.  So we’re going to invest, and are investing right now, in newinfrastructure -- expanding broadband, health information technology, advancedmanufacturing facilities, America’s first high-speed rail network.  We’re also investing in theideas and technologies that will lead to new jobs and entire new industries.
Consider what we’ve done with clean energy.  The tax credits and loan guarantees in theRecovery Act alone will lead to 720,000 clean energy jobs in America by 2012 -- 720,000.  I’llgive you one example.  The United States used to make less than 2 percent of the world’sadvanced batteries for hybrid cars.  By 2015, because of the investments that we made, we’llhave enough capacity to make up to 40 percent of these batteries.
Now, this brings me to an issue that’s on everybody’s minds right now -- namely, what kind ofenergy future can ensure our long-term prosperity.  The catastrophe unfolding in the Gulfright now may prove to be a result of human error, or of corporations taking dangerousshortcuts to compromise safety, or a combination of both.  And I’ve launched a NationalCommission so that the American people will have answers on exactly what happened.
  
But we have to acknowledge that there are inherent risks to drilling four miles beneath thesurface of the Earth, and these are risks -- these are risks that are bound to increase theharder oil extraction becomes.  We also have to acknowledge that an America run solely onfossil fuels should not be the vision we have for our children and our grandchildren.
We consume more than 20 percent of the world’s oil, but have less than 2 percent of theworld’s oil reserves.  So without a major change in our energy policy, our dependence on oilmeans that we will continue to send billions of dollars of our hard-earned wealth to othercountries every month -- including countries in dangerous and unstable regions.  In otherwords, our continued dependence on fossil fuels will jeopardize our national security.  It willsmother our planet.  And it will continue to put our economy and our environment at risk.
Now, I understand that we can’t end our dependence on fossil fuels overnight.  That’s why Isupported a careful plan of offshore oil production as one part of our overall energy strategy. But we can pursue such production only if it’s safe, and only if it’s used as a short-termsolution while we transition to a clean energy economy.
And the time has come to aggressively accelerate that transition.  The time has come, onceand for all, for this nation to fully embrace a clean energy future.  Now, that means continuingour unprecedented effort to make everything from our homes and businesses to our cars andtrucks more energy-efficient.  It means tapping into our natural gas reserves, and movingahead with our plan to expand our nation’s fleet of nuclear power plants.  It means rollingback billions of dollars of tax breaks to oil companies so we can prioritize investments in cleanenergy research and development.
But the only way the transition to clean energy will ultimately succeed is if the private sectoris fully invested in this future -- if capital comes off the sidelines and the ingenuity of ourentrepreneurs is unleashed.  And the only way to do that is by finally putting a price oncarbon pollution.
No, many businesses have already embraced this idea because it provides a level of certaintyabout the future.  And for those that face transition costs, we can help them adjust.  But if werefuse to take into account the full costs of our fossil fuel addiction -- if we don’t factor in theenvironmental costs and the national security costs and the true economic costs -- we willhave missed our best chance to seize a clean energy future.
The House of Representatives has already passed a comprehensive energy and climate bill,and there is currently a plan in the Senate -- a plan that was developed with ideas fromDemocrats and Republicans -- that would achieve the same goal.  And, Pittsburgh, I want youto know, the votes may not be there right now, but I intend to find them in the comingmonths. I will continue to make the case for a clean energy future wherever and whenever Ican.  I will work with anyone to get this done -- and we will get it done.
  
The next generation will not be held hostage to energy sources from the last century.  We arenot going to move backwards.  We are going to move forward.
This overarching principle -- that we must invest in and embrace the innovation andtechnology of the future and not the past -- that applies beyond our energy policy.  That’swhy we’ve decided to devote more than 3 percent of our GDP to research and development --to spur the discovery of services and products and businesses that we have yet to imagine.
We’ve proposed making the research and experimentation tax credit permanent -- a tax creditthat helps businesses afford the high costs of developing new technologies and new products. Last year, we made the largest investment in basic research funding in history.
The possibilities of where this research might lead are endless.  Imagine a new treatment thatkills cancer cells but leaves healthy ones untouched; regenerative medicine that ends theagonizing wait for an organ transplant.  Imagine a lightweight vest for soldiers and policeofficers that can stop armor-piercing bullets; educational software that’s as effective andengaging as a personal tutor; intelligent prosthetics that can enable a wounded veteran toplay the piano again.  And now imagine all the workers and small business owners andconsumers who would benefit from these discoveries.
We can’t know for certain what the future will bring.  We can’t guess with 100 percentaccuracy what industries and innovations will next shape our world.  I’m sure there weretimes when this city couldn’t imagine life without steel mills and heavy smog that filled thesestreets.  And when that industry shrank and so many jobs were lost, who could have guessedthat Pittsburgh would fare better than many other Rust Belt cities, and reemerge as a centerfor technology and green jobs, health care, and education?  Who would have thought that theUniversity of Pittsburgh Medical Center’s logo would one day adorn the U.S. Steel Tower, orthat this institute -- Carnegie Mellon -- would be the region’s largest employer?
All of this came to be because as a community, you prepared and adapted and invested in abetter future -- even if you weren’t always sure what that future would look like.
And that’s what America does.  That’s what we’ve always done.  The interests of the statusquo will always have the most vocal and powerful defenders at every level of government. There will always be lobbyists for the banks or the insurance industry that doesn’t want moreregulation; or the corporation that would prefer to see more tax breaks instead of moreinvestments in infrastructure or education.  And let’s face it -- a lot of us find the prospect ofchange scary, even when we know the status quo isn’t working for us.
But there’s no natural lobby for the clean energy company that may start a few years fromnow.
  
There’s no natural lobby for the research that may lead to a lifesaving medical breakthrough. There’s no natural lobby for the student who may not be able to afford a college education,but if they got one could end up making discoveries that would transform America and theworld.
It’s our job as a nation to advocate on behalf of the America that we hope for -- to makedecisions that will benefit the next generation -- even if it’s not always popular; even if wecan’t always see those benefits in the short-term.  We make decisions like this on behalf ofour own children every single day.  And while it’s harder to do with an entire country as largeand diverse as ours, it’s no less important.
The role of government has never been to plan every detail or dictate every outcome.  At itsbest, government has simply knocked away barriers to opportunity and laid the foundation fora better future.  Our people -- with all their drive and ingenuity -- always end up building therest.  And if we can do that again -- if we can continue building that foundation and makingthose hard decisions on behalf of the next generation -- I have no doubt that we will leave ourchildren the America that we all hope for.
Thank you, everybody.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.
