Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, fellow delegates, ladies and gentlemen:  Each year wecome together to reaffirm the founding vision of this institution.  For most of recorded history,individual aspirations were subject to the whims of tyrants and empires.  Divisions of race andreligion and tribe were settled through the sword and the clash of armies.  The idea thatnations and peoples could come together in peace to solve their disputes and advance acommon prosperity seemed unimaginable. 
It took the awful carnage of two world wars to shift our thinking.  The leaders who built theUnited Nations were not naïve; they did not think this body could eradicate all wars.  But inthe wake of millions dead and continents in rubble, and with the development of nuclearweapons that could annihilate a planet, they understood that humanity could not survive thecourse it was on.  And so they gave us this institution, believing that it could allow us toresolve conflicts, enforce rules of behavior, and build habits of cooperation that would growstronger over time. 
For decades, the United Nations has in fact made a difference -- from helping to eradicatedisease, to educating children, to brokering peace.  But like every generation of leaders, weface new and profound challenges, and this body continues to be tested.  The question iswhether we possess the wisdom and the courage, as nation-states and members of aninternational community, to squarely meet those challenges; whether the United Nations canmeet the tests of our time.
  
For much of my tenure as President, some of our most urgent challenges have revolvedaround an increasingly integrated global economy, and our efforts to recover from the worsteconomic crisis of our lifetime.  Now, five years after the global economy collapsed, andthanks to coordinated efforts by the countries here today, jobs are being created, globalfinancial systems have stabilized, and people are once again being lifted out of poverty.  Butthis progress is fragile and unequal, and we still have work to do together to assure that ourcitizens can access the opportunities that they need to thrive in the 21st century. 
Together, we’ve also worked to end a decade of war.  Five years ago, nearly 180,000Americans were serving in harm’s way, and the war in Iraq was the dominant issue in ourrelationship with the rest of the world.  Today, all of our troops have left Iraq.  Next year, aninternational coalition will end its war in Afghanistan, having achieved its mission ofdismantling the core of al Qaeda that attacked us on 9/11.
For the United States, these new circumstances have also meant shifting away from aperpetual war footing.  Beyond bringing our troops home, we have limited the use of dronesso they target only those who pose a continuing, imminent threat to the United States wherecapture is not feasible, and there is a near certainty of no civilian casualties.  We’retransferring detainees to other countries and trying terrorists in courts of law, while workingdiligently to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay.  And just as we reviewed how we deploy ourextraordinary military capabilities in a way that lives up to our ideals, we’ve begun to reviewthe way that we gather intelligence, so that we properly balance the legitimate securityconcerns of our citizens and allies with the privacy concerns that all people share. 
As a result of this work, and cooperation with allies and partners, the world is more stablethan it was five years ago.  But even a glance at today’s headlines indicates that dangersremain.  In Kenya, we’ve seen terrorists target innocent civilians in a crowded shopping mall,and our hearts go out to the families of those who have been affected.  In Pakistan, nearly100 people were recently killed by suicide bombers outside a church.  In Iraq, killings and carbombs continue to be a terrible part of life.  And meanwhile, al Qaeda has splintered intoregional networks and militias, which doesn't give them the capacity at this point to carry outattacks like 9/11, but does pose serious threats to governments and diplomats, businessesand civilians all across the globe.
Just as significantly, the convulsions in the Middle East and North Africa have laid bare deepdivisions within societies, as an old order is upended and people grapple with what comesnext.  Peaceful movements have too often been answered by violence -- from those resistingchange and from extremists trying to hijack change.  Sectarian conflict has reemerged.  Andthe potential spread of weapons of mass destruction continues to cast a shadow over thepursuit of peace. 
  
Nowhere have we seen these trends converge more powerfully than in Syria.  There, peacefulprotests against an authoritarian regime were met with repression and slaughter.  In the faceof such carnage, many retreated to their sectarian identity -- Alawite and Sunni; Christian andKurd -- and the situation spiraled into civil war. 
The international community recognized the stakes early on, but our response has notmatched the scale of the challenge.  Aid cannot keep pace with the suffering of the woundedand displaced.  A peace process is stillborn.  America and others have worked to bolster themoderate opposition, but extremist groups have still taken root to exploit the crisis.  Assad’straditional allies have propped him up, citing principles of sovereignty to shield his regime. And on August 21st, the regime used chemical weapons in an attack that killed more than1,000 people, including hundreds of children.
Now, the crisis in Syria, and the destabilization of the region, goes to the heart of broaderchallenges that the international community must now confront.  How should we respond toconflicts in the Middle East and North Africa -- conflicts between countries, but also conflictswithin them?  How do we address the choice of standing callously by while children aresubjected to nerve gas, or embroiling ourselves in someone else’s civil war?  What is the roleof force in resolving disputes that threaten the stability of the region and undermine all basicstandards of civilized conduct?  What is the role of the United Nations and international law inmeeting cries for justice?
Today, I want to outline where the United States of America stands on these issues.  Withrespect to Syria, we believe that as a starting point, the international community must enforcethe ban on chemical weapons.  When I stated my willingness to order a limited strike againstthe Assad regime in response to the brazen use of chemical weapons, I did not do so lightly.  Idid so because I believe it is in the security interest of the United States and in the interest ofthe world to meaningfully enforce a prohibition whose origins are older than the UnitedNations itself.  The ban against the use of chemical weapons, even in war, has been agreed toby 98 percent of humanity.  It is strengthened by the searing memories of soldiers suffocatingin the trenches; Jews slaughtered in gas chambers; Iranians poisoned in the many tens ofthousands.
The evidence is overwhelming that the Assad regime used such weapons on August 21st. U.N. inspectors gave a clear accounting that advanced rockets fired large quantities of saringas at civilians.  These rockets were fired from a regime-controlled neighborhood, and landedin opposition neighborhoods.  It’s an insult to human reason -- and to the legitimacy of thisinstitution -- to suggest that anyone other than the regime carried out this attack.
Now, I know that in the immediate aftermath of the attack there were those who questionedthe legitimacy of even a limited strike in the absence of a clear mandate from the SecurityCouncil.  But without a credible military threat, the Security Council had demonstrated noinclination to act at all.
  
However, as I’ve discussed with President Putin for over a year, most recently in St.Petersburg, my preference has always been a diplomatic resolution to this issue.  And in thepast several weeks, the United States, Russia and our allies have reached an agreement toplace Syria’s chemical weapons under international control, and then to destroy them.
The Syrian government took a first step by giving an accounting of its stockpiles.  Now theremust be a strong Security Council resolution to verify that the Assad regime is keeping itscommitments, and there must be consequences if they fail to do so.  If we cannot agree evenon this, then it will show that the United Nations is incapable of enforcing the most basic ofinternational laws.  On the other hand, if we succeed, it will send a powerful message that theuse of chemical weapons has no place in the 21st century, and that this body means what itsays.
Agreement on chemical weapons should energize a larger diplomatic effort to reach a politicalsettlement within Syria.  I do not believe that military action -- by those within Syria, or byexternal powers -- can achieve a lasting peace.  Nor do I believe that America or any nationshould determine who will lead Syria; that is for the Syrian people to decide.  Nevertheless, aleader who slaughtered his citizens and gassed children to death cannot regain the legitimacyto lead a badly fractured country.  The notion that Syria can somehow return to a pre-warstatus quo is a fantasy. 
It’s time for Russia and Iran to realize that insisting on Assad’s rule will lead directly to theoutcome that they fear:  an increasingly violent space for extremists to operate.  In turn,those of us who continue to support the moderate opposition must persuade them that theSyrian people cannot afford a collapse of state institutions, and that a political settlementcannot be reached without addressing the legitimate fears and concerns of Alawites and otherminorities.
We are committed to working this political track.  And as we pursue a settlement, let’sremember this is not a zero-sum endeavor.  We’re no longer in a Cold War.  There’s no GreatGame to be won, nor does America have any interest in Syria beyond the wellbeing of itspeople, the stability of its neighbors, the elimination of chemical weapons, and ensuring that itdoes not become a safe haven for terrorists. 
I welcome the influence of all nations that can help bring about a peaceful resolution of Syria’scivil war.  And as we move the Geneva process forward, I urge all nations here to step up tomeet humanitarian needs in Syria and surrounding countries.  America has committed over abillion dollars to this effort, and today I can announce that we will be providing an additional$340 million.  No aid can take the place of a political resolution that gives the Syrian peoplethe chance to rebuild their country, but it can help desperate people to survive.
  
What broader conclusions can be drawn from America’s policy toward Syria?  I know there arethose who have been frustrated by our unwillingness to use our military might to deposeAssad, and believe that a failure to do so indicates a weakening of American resolve in theregion.  Others have suggested that my willingness to direct even limited military strikes todeter the further use of chemical weapons shows we’ve learned nothing from Iraq, and thatAmerica continues to seek control over the Middle East for our own purposes.  In this way, thesituation in Syria mirrors a contradiction that has persisted in the region for decades:  theUnited States is chastised for meddling in the region, accused of having a hand in all mannerof conspiracy; at the same time, the United States is blamed for failing to do enough to solvethe region’s problems and for showing indifference toward suffering Muslim populations.
I realize some of this is inevitable, given America’s role in the world.  But these contradictoryattitudes have a practical impact on the American people’s support for our involvement in theregion, and allow leaders in the region -- as well as the international community sometimes --to avoid addressing difficult problems themselves. 
So let me take this opportunity to outline what has been U.S. policy towards the Middle Eastand North Africa, and what will be my policy during the remainder of my presidency.
The United States of America is prepared to use all elements of our power, including militaryforce, to secure our core interests in the region. 
We will confront external aggression against our allies and partners, as we did in the Gulf War.
We will ensure the free flow of energy from the region to the world.  Although America issteadily reducing our own dependence on imported oil, the world still depends on the region’senergy supply, and a severe disruption could destabilize the entire global economy.
We will dismantle terrorist networks that threaten our people.  Wherever possible, we willbuild the capacity of our partners, respect the sovereignty of nations, and work to address theroot causes of terror.  But when it’s necessary to defend the United States against terroristattack, we will take direct action.
And finally, we will not tolerate the development or use of weapons of mass destruction.  Justas we consider the use of chemical weapons in Syria to be a threat to our own nationalsecurity, we reject the development of nuclear weapons that could trigger a nuclear arms racein the region, and undermine the global nonproliferation regime.
Now, to say that these are America’s core interests is not to say that they are our onlyinterests.  We deeply believe it is in our interests to see a Middle East and North Africa that ispeaceful and prosperous, and will continue to promote democracy and human rights and openmarkets, because we believe these practices achieve peace and prosperity.  But I also believethat we can rarely achieve these objectives through unilateral American action, particularlythrough military action.  Iraq shows us that democracy cannot simply be imposed by force. 
  
Rather, these objectives are best achieved when we partner with the international communityand with the countries and peoples of the region.
So what does this mean going forward?  In the near term, America’s diplomatic efforts willfocus on two particular issues:  Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weapons, and the Arab-Israeliconflict.  While these issues are not the cause of all the region’s problems, they have been amajor source of instability for far too long, and resolving them can help serve as a foundationfor a broader peace.
The United States and Iran have been isolated from one another since the Islamic Revolutionof 1979.  This mistrust has deep roots.  Iranians have long complained of a history of U.S.interference in their affairs and of America’s role in overthrowing an Iranian governmentduring the Cold War.  On the other hand, Americans see an Iranian government that hasdeclared the United States an enemy and directly -- or through proxies -- taken Americanhostages, killed U.S. troops and civilians, and threatened our ally Israel with destruction.
I don’t believe this difficult history can be overcome overnight -- the suspicions run too deep. But I do believe that if we can resolve the issue of Iran’s nuclear program, that can serve as amajor step down a long road towards a different relationship, one based on mutual interestsand mutual respect.
Since I took office, I’ve made it clear in letters to the Supreme Leader in Iran and morerecently to President Rouhani that America prefers to resolve our concerns over Iran’s nuclearprogram peacefully, although we are determined to prevent Iran from developing a nuclearweapon.  We are not seeking regime change and we respect the right of the Iranian people toaccess peaceful nuclear energy.  Instead, we insist that the Iranian government meet itsresponsibilities under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and U.N. Security Councilresolutions.
Meanwhile, the Supreme Leader has issued a fatwa against the development of nuclearweapons, and President Rouhani has just recently reiterated that the Islamic Republic willnever develop a nuclear weapon.
So these statements made by our respective governments should offer the basis for ameaningful agreement.  We should be able to achieve a resolution that respects the rights ofthe Iranian people, while giving the world confidence that the Iranian program is peaceful. But to succeed, conciliatory words will have to be matched by actions that are transparent andverifiable.  After all, it's the Iranian government’s choices that have led to the comprehensivesanctions that are currently in place.  And this is not simply an issue between the UnitedStates and Iran.  The world has seen Iran evade its responsibilities in the past and has anabiding interest in making sure that Iran meets its obligations in the future.   
But I want to be clear we are encouraged that President Rouhani received from the Iranianpeople a mandate to pursue a more moderate course.
  
And given President Rouhani’s stated commitment to reach an agreement, I am directing JohnKerry to pursue this effort with the Iranian government in close cooperation with the EuropeanUnion -- the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Russia and China. 
The roadblocks may prove to be too great, but I firmly believe the diplomatic path must betested.  For while the status quo will only deepen Iran’s isolation, Iran’s genuine commitmentto go down a different path will be good for the region and the world, and will help the Iranianpeople meet their extraordinary potential -- in commerce and culture; in science andeducation.
We are also determined to resolve a conflict that goes back even further than our differenceswith Iran, and that is the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis.  I’ve made it clear that theUnited States will never compromise our commitment to Israel’s security, nor our support forits existence as a Jewish state.  Earlier this year, in Jerusalem, I was inspired by youngIsraelis who stood up for the belief that peace was necessary, just, and possible.  And Ibelieve there’s a growing recognition within Israel that the occupation of the West Bank istearing at the democratic fabric of the Jewish state.  But the children of Israel have the rightto live in a world where the nations assembled in this body fully recognize their country, andwhere we unequivocally reject those who fire rockets at their homes or incite others to hatethem.
Likewise, the United States remains committed to the belief that the Palestinian people have aright to live with security and dignity in their own sovereign state.  On the same trip, I had theopportunity to meet with young Palestinians in Ramallah whose ambition and incrediblepotential are matched by the pain they feel in having no firm place in the community ofnations.  They are understandably cynical that real progress will ever be made, and they’refrustrated by their families enduring the daily indignity of occupation.  But they too recognizethat two states is the only real path to peace -- because just as the Palestinian people mustnot be displaced, the state of Israel is here to stay.
So the time is now ripe for the entire international community to get behind the pursuit ofpeace.  Already, Israeli and Palestinian leaders have demonstrated a willingness to takesignificant political risks.  President Abbas has put aside efforts to short-cut the pursuit ofpeace and come to the negotiating table.  Prime Minister Netanyahu has released Palestinianprisoners and reaffirmed his commitment to a Palestinian state.  Current talks are focused onfinal status issues of borders and security, refugees and Jerusalem.
So now the rest of us must be willing to take risks as well.  Friends of Israel, including theUnited States, must recognize that Israel’s security as a Jewish and democratic state dependsupon the realization of a Palestinian state, and we should say so clearly.  Arab states, andthose who supported the Palestinians, must recognize that stability will only be servedthrough a two-state solution and a secure Israel. 
  
All of us must recognize that peace will be a powerful tool to defeat extremists throughout theregion, and embolden those who are prepared to build a better future.  And moreover, ties oftrade and commerce between Israelis and Arabs could be an engine of growth and opportunityat a time when too many young people in the region are languishing without work.  So let’semerge from the familiar corners of blame and prejudice.  Let’s support Israeli and Palestinianleaders who are prepared to walk the difficult road to peace.
Real breakthroughs on these two issues -- Iran’s nuclear program, and Israeli-Palestinianpeace -- would have a profound and positive impact on the entire Middle East and NorthAfrica.  But the current convulsions arising out of the Arab Spring remind us that a just andlasting peace cannot be measured only by agreements between nations.  It must also bemeasured by our ability to resolve conflict and promote justice within nations.  And by thatmeasure, it’s clear that all of us have a lot more work to do. 
When peaceful transitions began in Tunisia and Egypt, the entire world was filled with hope. And although the United States -- like others -- was struck by the speed of transition, andalthough we did not -- and in fact could not -- dictate events, we chose to support those whocalled for change.  And we did so based on the belief that while these transitions will be hardand take time, societies based upon democracy and openness and the dignity of the individualwill ultimately be more stable, more prosperous, and more peaceful. 
Over the last few years, particularly in Egypt, we’ve seen just how hard this transition will be. Mohamed Morsi was democratically elected, but proved unwilling or unable to govern in a waythat was fully inclusive.  The interim government that replaced him responded to the desiresof millions of Egyptians who believed the revolution had taken a wrong turn, but it, too, hasmade decisions inconsistent with inclusive democracy -- through an emergency law, andrestrictions on the press and civil society and opposition parties.
Of course, America has been attacked by all sides of this internal conflict, simultaneouslyaccused of supporting the Muslim Brotherhood, and engineering their removal of power.  Infact, the United States has purposely avoided choosing sides.  Our overriding interestthroughout these past few years has been to encourage a government that legitimatelyreflects the will of the Egyptian people, and recognizes true democracy as requiring a respectfor minority rights and the rule of law, freedom of speech and assembly, and a strong civilsociety.
That remains our interest today.  And so, going forward, the United States will maintain aconstructive relationship with the interim government that promotes core interests like theCamp David Accords and counterterrorism.  We’ll continue support in areas like education thatdirectly benefit the Egyptian people.  But we have not proceeded with the delivery of certainmilitary systems, and our support will depend upon Egypt’s progress in pursuing a moredemocratic path. 
  
And our approach to Egypt reflects a larger point:  The United States will at times work withgovernments that do not meet, at least in our view, the highest international expectations,but who work with us on our core interests.  Nevertheless, we will not stop asserting principlesthat are consistent with our ideals, whether that means opposing the use of violence as ameans of suppressing dissent, or supporting the principles embodied in the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights. 
We will reject the notion that these principles are simply Western exports, incompatible withIslam or the Arab World.  We believe they are the birthright of every person.  And while werecognize that our influence will at times be limited, although we will be wary of efforts toimpose democracy through military force, and although we will at times be accused ofhypocrisy and inconsistency, we will be engaged in the region for the long haul.  For the hardwork of forging freedom and democracy is the task of a generation.
And this includes efforts to resolve sectarian tensions that continue to surface in places likeIraq, Bahrain and Syria.  We understand such longstanding issues cannot be solved byoutsiders; they must be addressed by Muslim communities themselves.  But we’ve seengrinding conflicts come to an end before -- most recently in Northern Ireland, where Catholicsand Protestants finally recognized that an endless cycle of conflict was causing bothcommunities to fall behind a fast-moving world.  And so we believe those same sectarianconflicts can be overcome in the Middle East and North Africa. 
To summarize, the United States has a hard-earned humility when it comes to our ability todetermine events inside other countries.  The notion of American empire may be usefulpropaganda, but it isn’t borne out by America’s current policy or by public opinion.  Indeed, asrecent debates within the United States over Syria clearly show, the danger for the world isnot an America that is too eager to immerse itself in the affairs of other countries or to takeon every problem in the region as its own.  The danger for the world is that the United States,after a decade of war -- rightly concerned about issues back home, aware of the hostility thatour engagement in the region has engendered throughout the Muslim world -- maydisengage, creating a vacuum of leadership that no other nation is ready to fill.
I believe such disengagement would be a mistake.  I believe America must remain engagedfor our own security.  But I also believe the world is better for it.  Some may disagree, but Ibelieve America is exceptional -- in part because we have shown a willingness through thesacrifice of blood and treasure to stand up not only for our own narrow self-interests, but forthe interests of all. 
I must be honest, though.  We're far more likely to invest our energy in those countries thatwant to work with us, that invest in their people instead of a corrupt few; that embrace avision of society where everyone can contribute -- men and women, Shia or Sunni, Muslim,Christian or Jew.
  
Because from Europe to Asia, from Africa to the Americas, nations that have persevered on ademocratic path have emerged more prosperous, more peaceful, and more invested inupholding our common security and our common humanity.  And I believe that the same willhold true for the Arab world.
This leads me to a final point.  There will be times when the breakdown of societies is sogreat, the violence against civilians so substantial that the international community will becalled upon to act.  This will require new thinking and some very tough choices.  While theUnited Nations was designed to prevent wars between states, increasingly we face thechallenge of preventing slaughter within states.  And these challenges will grow morepronounced as we are confronted with states that are fragile or failing -- places wherehorrendous violence can put innocent men, women and children at risk, with no hope ofprotection from their national institutions.
I have made it clear that even when America’s core interests are not directly threatened, westand ready to do our part to prevent mass atrocities and protect basic human rights.  But wecannot and should not bear that burden alone.  In Mali, we supported both the Frenchintervention that successfully pushed back al Qaeda, and the African forces who are keepingthe peace.  In Eastern Africa, we are working with partners to bring the Lord’s ResistanceArmy to an end.  And in Libya, when the Security Council provided a mandate to protectcivilians, America joined a coalition that took action.  Because of what we did there, countlesslives were saved, and a tyrant could not kill his way back to power.
I know that some now criticize the action in Libya as an object lesson.  They point to theproblems that the country now confronts -- a democratically elected government struggling toprovide security; armed groups, in some places extremists, ruling parts of a fractured land. And so these critics argue that any intervention to protect civilians is doomed to fail -- look atLibya.  No one is more mindful of these problems than I am, for they resulted in the death offour outstanding U.S. citizens who were committed to the Libyan people, includingAmbassador Chris Stevens -- a man whose courageous efforts helped save the city ofBenghazi.  But does anyone truly believe that the situation in Libya would be better if Qaddafihad been allowed to kill, imprison, or brutalize his people into submission?  It’s far more likelythat without international action, Libya would now be engulfed in civil war and bloodshed.
We live in a world of imperfect choices.  Different nations will not agree on the need for actionin every instance, and the principle of sovereignty is at the center of our international order. But sovereignty cannot be a shield for tyrants to commit wanton murder, or an excuse for theinternational community to turn a blind eye.  While we need to be modest in our belief that wecan remedy every evil, while we need to be mindful that the world is full of unintendedconsequences, should we really accept the notion that the world is powerless in the face of aRwanda or Srebrenica?  If that’s the world that people want to live in, they should say so andreckon with the cold logic of mass graves.
  
But I believe we can embrace a different future.  And if we don’t want to choose betweeninaction and war, we must get better -- all of us -- at the policies that prevent the breakdownof basic order.  Through respect for the responsibilities of nations and the rights ofindividuals.  Through meaningful sanctions for those who break the rules.  Through doggeddiplomacy that resolves the root causes of conflict, not merely its aftermath.  Throughdevelopment assistance that brings hope to the marginalized.  And yes, sometimes --although this will not be enough -- there are going to be moments where the internationalcommunity will need to acknowledge that the multilateral use of military force may berequired to prevent the very worst from occurring.
Ultimately, this is the international community that America seeks -- one where nations do notcovet the land or resources of other nations, but one in which we carry out the foundingpurpose of this institution and where we all take responsibility.  A world in which the rulesestablished out of the horrors of war can help us resolve conflicts peacefully, and prevent thekinds of wars that our forefathers fought.  A world where human beings can live with dignityand meet their basic needs, whether they live in New York or Nairobi; in Peshawar orDamascus.
These are extraordinary times, with extraordinary opportunities.  Thanks to human progress,a child born anywhere on Earth today can do things today that 60 years ago would have beenout of reach for the mass of humanity.  I saw this in Africa, where nations moving beyondconflict are now poised to take off.  And America is with them, partnering to feed the hungryand care for the sick, and to bring power to places off the grid.
I see it across the Pacific region, where hundreds of millions have been lifted out of poverty ina single generation.  I see it in the faces of young people everywhere who can access theentire world with the click of a button, and who are eager to join the cause of eradicatingextreme poverty, and combating climate change, starting businesses, expanding freedom, andleaving behind the old ideological battles of the past.  That’s what’s happening in Asia andAfrica.  It’s happening in Europe and across the Americas.  That’s the future that the people ofthe Middle East and North Africa deserve as well -- one where they can focus on opportunity,instead of whether they’ll be killed or repressed because of who they are or what they believe.
Time and again, nations and people have shown our capacity to change -- to live up tohumanity’s highest ideals, to choose our better history.  Last month, I stood where 50 yearsago Martin Luther King Jr. told America about his dream, at a time when many people of myrace could not even vote for President.  Earlier this year, I stood in the small cell where NelsonMandela endured decades cut off from his own people and the world.  Who are we to believethat today’s challenges cannot be overcome, when we have seen what changes the humanspirit can bring?  Who in this hall can argue that the future belongs to those who seek torepress that spirit, rather than those who seek to liberate it?
  
I know what side of history I want to the United States of America to be on.  We're ready tomeet tomorrow’s challenges with you -- firm in the belief that all men and women are in factcreated equal, each individual possessed with a dignity and inalienable rights that cannot bedenied.  That is why we look to the future not with fear, but with hope.  And that’s why weremain convinced that this community of nations can deliver a more peaceful, prosperous andjust world to the next generation.
Thank you very much.
