Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you so much, everybody. Please have a seat, have aseat.  Before I get started, can we get the new presidential setup out here? 
It’s worked before.
That's more like it.
It is great to be back.  What a year, huh?  I usually start these dinners with a few self-
deprecating jokes.  After my stellar 2013, what could I possibly talk about?
  
I admit it -- last year was rough.  Sheesh.  At one point things got so bad, the 47 percentcalled Mitt Romney to apologize.
Of course, we rolled out healthcare.gov.  That could have gone better.  In 2008 my sloganwas, "Yes We Can."  In 2013 my slogan was, "Control-Alt-Delete."  On the plus side, they didturn the launch of healthcare.gov into one of the year's biggest movies.
But rather than dwell on the past, I would like to pivot to this dinner.  Let's welcome ourheadliner this evening, Joel McHale. On "Community," Joel plays a preening, self-obsessednarcissist.  So this dinner must be a real change of pace for you.
I want to thank the White House Correspondents Association for hosting us here tonight.  Iam happy to be here, even though I am a little jet-lagged from my trip to Malaysia.  Thelengths we have to go to get CNN coverage these days. I think they're still searching for theirtable.
MSNBC is here.  They're a little overwhelmed.  They've never seen an audience this bigbefore.
But, look, everybody is trying to keep up with this incredibly fast-changing media landscape. For example, I got a lot of grief on cable news for promoting Obamacare to young people onBetween Two Ferns.  But that's what young people like to watch.  And to be fair, I am not thefirst person on television between two potted plants.
Sometimes I do feel disrespected by you reporters.  But that's okay.  Seattle Seahawkcornerback Richard Sherman is here tonight.  And he gave me some great tips on how tohandle it.  Jake Tapper, don't you ever talk about me like that!1 I'm the best President in thegame!
What do you think, Richard?  Was that good?  A little more feeling next time?
While we're talking sports, just last month, a wonderful story -- an American won the BostonMarathon for first time in 30 years.  Which was inspiring and only fair, since a Kenyan hasbeen president for the last six. Had to even things out.
We have some other athletes here tonight, including Olympic snowboarding gold medalistJamie Anderson is here.  We're proud of her.  Incredibly talented young lady.  Michelle and Iwatched the Olympics -- we cannot believe what these folks do -- death-defying feats --haven't seen somebody pull a "180" that fast since Rand Paul disinvited that Nevada rancherfrom this dinner.  As a general rule, things don't like end well if the sentence starts, Let metell you something "I know about the negro."2  You don't really need to hear the rest of it. Just a tip for you -- don't start your sentence that way.
  
Speaking of Rand Paul -- Colorado legalized marijuana this year, an interesting socialexperiment.  I do hope it doesn't lead to a whole lot of paranoid people who think that thefederal government is out to get them and listening to their phone calls.  That would be aproblem.
And speaking of conservative heroes, the Koch brothers bought a table here tonight.  But asusual, they used a shadowy right-wing organization as a front.  Hello, Fox News.
I'm just kidding.  Let's face it, Fox, you'll miss me when I'm gone. It will be harder to convincethe American people that Hillary was born in Kenya.
A lot of us really are concerned about the way big money is influencing our politics.  Iremember when a Super PAC was just me buying Marlboro 100s instead of regulars.
Of course, now that it's 2014, Washington is obsessed on the midterms.  Folks are saying thatwith my sagging poll numbers, my fellow Democrats don't really want me campaigning withthem.  And I don't think that's true -- although I did notice the other day that Sasha needed aspeaker at career day, and she invited Bill Clinton. I was a little hurt by that.
Both sides are doing whatever it takes to win the ruthless game.  Republicans -- this is a truestory -- Republicans actually brought in a group of consultants to teach their candidates howto speak to women.  This is true.  And I don't know if it will work with women, but Iunderstand that America's teenage boys are signing up to run for the Senate in droves.
Anyway, while you guys focus on the horserace, I'm going to do what I do -- I'm going to befocused on everyday Americans.  Just yesterday, I read a heartbreaking letter -- you know Iget letters from folks from around the country; every day I get 10 that I read -- this one gotto me.  A Virginia man who's been stuck in the same part-time job for years; no respect fromhis boss; no chance to get ahead.  I really wish Eric Cantor would stop writing me. You canjust pick up the phone, Eric.
And I'm feeling sorry -- believe it or not -- for the Speaker of the House, as well.  These days,the House Republicans actually give John Boehner a harder time than they give me, whichmeans orange really is the new black.
But I have not given up the idea of working with Congress. In fact, two weeks ago, SenatorTed Cruz and I, we got a bill done together.  And I have to say, the signing ceremony wassomething special.  We've got a picture of it I think.
Look, I know, Washington seems more dysfunctional than ever.  Gridlock has gotten so bad inthis town you have to wonder:  What did we do to piss off Chris Christie so bad?
  
One issue, for example, we haven't been able to agree on is unemployment insurance. Republicans continue to refuse to extend it.  And you know what, I am beginning to thinkthey've got a point.  If you want to get paid while not working, you should have to run forCongress just like everybody else.
Of course, there is one thing that keeps Republicans busy.  They have tried more than 50times to repeal Obamacare.  Despite that, 8 million people signed up for health care in thefirst open enrollment. Which does lead one to ask, How well does Obamacare have to workbefore you don't want to repeal it?  What if everybody's cholesterol drops to 120?  What ifyour yearly checkup came with tickets to a Clippers game?  Not the old, Donald SterlingClippers -- the new Oprah Clippers.  Would that be good enough? What if they gave MitchMcConnell a pulse?  What is it going to take?
Anyway, this year, I've promised to use more executive actions to get things done withoutCongress.  My critics call this the "imperial presidency."  The truth is, I just show up every dayin my office and do my job.  I've got a picture of this, I think.  You would think they'dappreciate a more assertive approach, considering that the new conservative darling is noneother than Vladimir Putin.  Last year, Pat Buchanan said Putin is "headed straight for theNobel Peace Prize."3  He said this.  Now I know it sounds crazy but to be fair, they give thoseto just about anybody these days.  So it could happen.
But it's not just Pat -- Rudy Giuliani said Putin is "what you call a leader."  Mike Huckabee andSean Hannity keep talking about his bare chest, which is kind of weird.  Look it up -- they talkabout it a lot.
It is strange to think that I have just two and a half years left in this office.  Everywhere Ilook, there are reminders that I only hold this job temporarily.
But it's a long time between now and 2016, and anything can happen.  You may have heardthe other day, Hillary had to dodge a flying shoe at a press conference.  I love that picture.
Regardless of what happens, I've run my last campaign and I'm beginning to think about mylegacy.  Some of you know -- Mayor Rahm Emanuel recently announced he is naming a highschool in Chicago after me, which is extremely humbling.  I was even more flattered to hearRick Perry, who is here tonight, is doing the same thing in Texas.  Take a look. Thank you,Rick.  It means a lot to me.
And I intend to enjoy all the free time that I will have.  George W. Bush took up painting afterhe left office, which inspired me to take up my own artistic side.  I'm sure we've got a shot ofthis. Maybe not.  The joke doesn't work without the slide.  Oh well.  Assume that it wasfunny. Does this happen to you, Joel?  It does?  Okay.
  
On a more serious note, tonight reminds us that we really are lucky to live in a country wherereporters get to give a head of state a hard time on a daily basis -- and then, once a year,give him or her the chance, at least, to try to return the favor.
But we also know that not every journalist, or photographer, or crewmember is so fortunate,because even as we celebrate the free press tonight, our thoughts are with those in placesaround the globe like Ukraine, and Afghanistan, and Syria, and Egypt, who risk everything --in some cases, even give their lives -- to report the news. 
And what tonight also reminds us is that the fight for full and fair access goes beyond thechance to ask a question.  As Steve mentioned, decades ago, an African American whowanted to cover his or her President might be barred from journalism school, burdened by JimCrow, and, once in Washington, banned from press conferences.  But after years of effort,black editors and publishers began meeting with FDR's press secretary, Steve Early.  And thenthey met with the President himself, who declared that a black reporter would get acredential.  And even when Harry McAlpin made history as the first African American to attenda presidential news conference, he wasn't always welcomed by the other reporters.  But hewas welcomed by the President, who told him, I'm glad to see you, McAlpin, and I'm veryhappy to have you here.
Now, that sentiment might have worn off once Harry asked him a question or two -- andHarry's battles continued.  But he made history.  And we're s proud of Sherman and his familyfor being here tonight, and the White House Correspondents Association for creating ascholarship in Harry's name.
For over 100 years, even as the White House Correspondents Association has told the story ofAmerica's progress, you've lived it, too -- gradually allowing equal access to women, andminorities, and gays, and Americans with disabilities.  And, yes, radio, and television, andInternet reporters, as well.  And through it all, you've helped make sure that even as societieschange, our fundamental commitment to the interaction between those who govern and thosewho ask questions doesn't change.  And as Jay will attest, it's a legacy you carry onenthusiastically  every single day.
And because this is the 100th anniversary of the Correspondents' Association, I actuallyrecorded an additional brief video thanking all of you for your hard work.  Can we run thevideo?
[Video fails to play.]
President Obama:  What's going on?  I was told this would work.  Does anybody know howto fix this?
  
[HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius enters from backstage.]
President Obama:  Oh, thank you.  You got it?
Secretary Sebelius:  I got this -- I see it all the time.  There, that should work. 
[Video plays.]
President Obama:  Thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you.  And God blessAmerica, and thank you, Kathleen Sebelius.
1
In a 12 December 2012 presidential press conference at the White House, reporter Jake Tapper asked President Obama the following, starklyloaded question: "It seems to a lot of observers that you made the political calculation in 2008, in your first term, and in 2012 not to talk aboutgun violence," Tapper said. "This is not the first incidence of horrific gun violence of your four years. Where've you been?"
2
Mr. Bundy's actual statement was intoned slightly differently: "I want to tell you one more thing I know about the Negro..."
3
During an October 18, 2013 Fox News Television segment entitled "Presidency in Peril" with host Sean Hannity, Mr.Buchanan facetiously remarked: "Vladimir Putin is headed straight for the Nobel Peace Prize."
