President Hollande; to the people of France; friends; the family; our veterans: 
If prayer were made of sound, the skies over England that night would have deafened theworld.
Captains paced their decks.  Pilots tapped their gauges.  Commanders pored over maps, fullyaware that for all the months of meticulous planning, everything could go wrong -- the winds,the tides, the element of surprise -- and above all, the audacious bet that what waited on theother side of the Channel would compel men not to shrink away, but to charge ahead.
Fresh-faced GIs rubbed trinkets, kissed pictures of sweethearts, checked and re-checked theirequipment. “God,” asked one, “give me guts.”  And in the pre-dawn hours, planes rumbleddown runways; gliders and paratroopers slipped through the sky; giant screws began to turnon an armada that looked like more ships than sea.  And more than 150,000 souls set offtowards this tiny sliver of sand upon which hung more than the fate of a war, but rather thecourse of human history.
  
President Hollande, distinguished guests, I’m honored to return here today to pay tribute tothe men and women of a generation who defied every danger -- among them, our veterans ofD-Day.  And, gentlemen, we are truly humbled by your presence here today.
Just last week, I received a letter from a French citizen.  “Dear Mr. President, and theAmerican people,” he wrote, “[we are] honored to welcome you… to thank you again for allthe pain and efforts of [the] American people and others in our common struggle forfreedom.”
Today, we say the same to the people of France.  Thank you, especially, for the generositythat you’ve shown the Americans who’ve come here over the generations -- to these beaches,and to this sacred place of rest for 9,387 Americans.  At the end of the war, when our shipsset off for America, filled with our fallen, tens of thousands of liberated Europeans turned outto say farewell, and they pledged to take care of the more than 60,000 Americans who wouldremain in cemeteries on this continent.  In the words of one man, we will take care of thefallen “as if their tombs were our children’s.”  And the people of France, you have kept yourword like the true friends you are.  We are forever grateful.
Here, we don’t just commemorate victory, as proud of that victory as we are.  We don’t justhonor sacrifice, as grateful as the world is.  We come to remember why America and our alliesgave so much for the survival of liberty at its moment of maximum peril.  We come to tell thestory of the men and women who did it so that it remains seared into the memory of a futureworld.
We tell this story for the old soldiers who pull themselves a little straighter today to salutebrothers who never made it home.  We tell the story for the daughter who clutches a fadedphoto of her father, forever young; for the child who runs his fingers over colorful ribbons heknows signify something of great consequence, even if he doesn’t yet fully understand why. We tell this story to bear what witness we can to what happened when the boys from Americareached Omaha Beach.
By daybreak, blood soaked the water, bombs broke the sky.  Thousands of paratroopers haddropped into the wrong landing sites; thousands of rounds bit into flesh and sand.  Entirecompanies’ worth of men fell in minutes.  “Hell’s Beach” had earned its name.
  
By 8:30 a.m., General Omar Bradley expected our troops to be a mile inland.  “Six hours afterthe landings,” he wrote, “we held only ten yards of beach.”  In this age of instantcommentary, the invasion would have swiftly and roundly been declared, as it was by oneofficer, “a debacle.”
But such a race to judgment would not have taken into account the courage of free men. “Success may not come with rushing speed,” President Roosevelt would say that night, “butwe shall return again and again.”  And paratroopers fought through the countryside to findone another.  Rangers pulled themselves over those cliffs to silence Nazi guns.  To the west,Americans took Utah Beach with relative ease.  To the east, the British tore through the coast,fueled by the fury of five years of bombs over London and a solemn vow to “fight them on thebeaches.”  The Canadians, whose shores had not been touched by war, drove far into France. And here, at Omaha, troops who finally made it to the seawall used it as shelter -- where ageneral barked, “If you’re Rangers… lead the way!”
By the end of that longest day, this beach had been fought, lost, refought, and won -- a pieceof Europe once again liberated and free.  Hitler’s Wall was breached, letting loose Patton’sArmy to pour into France.  Within a week, the world’s bloodiest beach had become the world’sbusiest port.  Within a month, one million Allied troops thundered through Normandy intoEurope, and as our armies marched across the continent, one pilot said it looked “as if thevery crust of the Earth had shaken loose.”  The Arc de Triomphe lit up for the first time inyears, and Paris was punctuated by shouts of “Vive la France!” and “Vive les États-Unis!”
Of course, even as we gather here at Normandy, we remember that freedom’s victory wasalso made possible by so many others who wore America’s uniform.  Two years before hecommanded armies, Eisenhower’s troops sliced through North Africa.  Three times before D-
Day, our GIs stormed the beaches at Sicily, Salerno, Anzio.  Divisions like the Fighting 36thbrawled their way through Italy, fighting through the mud for months, marching throughtowns past waving children before opening the gates to Rome.  As the “dogfaces” marched tovictory in Europe, the Devil Dogs -- the Marines -- clawed their way from island to island inthe Pacific, in some of the war’s fiercest fighting.  And back home, an army of women --including my grandmother -- rolled up their sleeves to help build a mighty arsenal ofdemocracy.
  
But it was here, on these shores, that the tide was turned in that common struggle forfreedom.  What more powerful manifestation of America’s commitment to human freedomthan the sight of wave after wave after wave of young men boarding those boats to liberatepeople they had never met?
We say it now as if it couldn’t be any other way.  But in the annals of history, the world hadnever seen anything like it.  And when the war was won, we claimed no spoils of victory -- wehelped Europe rebuild.  We claimed no land other than the earth where we buried those whogave their lives under our flag and where we station those who still serve under it.  ButAmerica’s claim -- our commitment -- to liberty, our claim to equality, our claim to freedomand to the inherent dignity of every human being -- that claim is written in the blood on thesebeaches, and it will endure for eternity.
Omaha -- Normandy -- this was democracy’s beachhead.  And our victory in that war decidednot just a century, but shaped the security and well-being of all posterity.  We worked to turnold adversaries into new allies.  We built new prosperity.  We stood once more with the peopleof this continent through a long twilight struggle until finally a wall tumbled down, and an IronCurtain, too.  And from Western Europe to East, from South America to Southeast Asia -- 70years of democratic movement spread.  And nations that once knew only the blinders of fearbegan to taste the blessings of freedom.
None of that would have happened without the men who were willing to lay down their livesfor people they’d never met and ideals they couldn’t live without.
None of it would have happened without the troops President Roosevelt called “the life-bloodof America… the hope of the world.”
They left home barely more than boys and returned home heroes.  But to their great credit,that is not how this generation carried itself.  After the war, some put away their medals,were quiet about their service, moved on.  Some, carrying shrapnel and scars, found thatmoving on was much harder.  Many, like my grandfather, who served in Patton’s Army, lived aquiet life, trading one uniform and set of responsibilities for another -- as a teacher, or asalesman, or a doctor, or an engineer, a dad, a grandpa.
  
Our country made sure millions of them earned a college education, opening up opportunityon an unprecedented scale.  And they married those sweethearts and bought new homes andraised families and built businesses, lifting up the greatest middle class the world has everknown.  And through it all, they were inspired, I suspect, by memories of their fallen brothers-- memories that drove them to live their lives each day as best they possibly could.
Whenever the world makes you cynical, stop and think of these men.  Whenever you losehope, stop and think of these men.
Think of Wilson Colwell, who was told he couldn’t pilot a plane without a high school degree,so he decided to jump out of a plane instead.  And he did, here on D-Day, with the 101stAirborne when he was just 16 years old.
Think of Harry Kulkowitz, the Jewish son of Russian immigrants, who fudged his age atenlistment so he could join his friends in the fight.  And don’t worry, Harry, the statute oflimitations has expired. Harry came ashore at Utah Beach on D-Day.  And now that he’s comeback, we said he could have anything he wants for lunch today -- he helped liberate thiscoast, after all.  But he said a hamburger would do fine.  What’s more American than that?
Think of “Rock” Merritt, who saw a recruitment poster asking him if he was man enough to bea paratrooper -- so he signed up on the spot.  And that decision landed him here on D-Daywith the 508th regiment, a unit that would suffer heavy casualties.  And 70 years later, it’ssaid that all across Fort Bragg, they know Rock -- not just for his exploits on D-Day, or his 35years in the Army, but because 91-year-old Rock Merritt still spends his time speaking to theyoung men and women of today’s Army and still bleeds “O.D. Green” for his 82nd Airborne.
Whenever the world makes you cynical, whenever you doubt that courage and goodness ispossible -- stop and think of these men.
Wilson and Harry and Rock, they are here today, and although I know we already gave thema rousing round of applause, along with all our veterans of D-Day -- if you can stand, pleasestand; if not, please raise your hand.  Let us recognize your service once more.  These menwaged war so that we might know peace.  They sacrificed so that we might be free.  Theyfought in hopes of a day when we’d no longer need to fight.  We are grateful to them.
  
And, gentlemen, I want each of you to know that your legacy is in good hands.  For in a timewhen it has never been more tempting to pursue narrow self-interest, to slough off commonendeavor, this generation of Americans, a new generation -- our men and women of war --have chosen to do their part as well.
Rock, I want you to know that Staff Sergeant Melvin Cedillo-Martin, who’s here today, isfollowing in your footsteps.  He just had to become an American first -- because Melvin wasborn in Honduras, moved to the United States, joined the Army.  After tours in Iraq andAfghanistan, he was reassigned to the 82nd Airborne.  And Sunday, he’ll parachute intoNormandy.  “I became part of a family of real American heroes,” he said.  “The Paratroopersof the 82nd.”
Wilson, you should know that Specialist Jannise Rodriguez joined the Army not even two yearsago, was assigned to the 101st Airborne, and just last month earned the title of the 101stAirborne Division Air Assault Soldier of the Year.  And that’s inspiring but not surprising, whenthe women of today’s military have taken on responsibilities, including combat, like neverbefore.
I want each of you to know that their commitment to their fellow servicemembers andveterans endures.  Sergeant First Class Brian Hawthorne’s grandfather served under GeneralPatton and General MacArthur.  Brian himself served two tours in Iraq, earned the Bronze Starin Baghdad for saving the life of his best friend, and today, he and his wife use theirexperience to help other veterans and military families navigate theirs.  And Brian is here inNormandy to participate in Sunday’s jump, and here, just yesterday, he reenlisted in theArmy Reserve.
And this generation -- this 9/11 Generation of servicemembers -- they, too, felt something. They answered some call; they said “I will go.”  They, too, chose to serve a cause that’sgreater than self -- many even after they knew they’d be sent into harm’s way.  And for morethan a decade, they have endured tour after tour.
Sergeant First Class Cory Remsburg has served ten.  And I’ve told Cory’s incredible storybefore, most recently when he sat with my wife, Michelle, at the State of the Union address. It was here, at Omaha Beach, on the 65th anniversary of D-Day, where I first met Cory andhis fellow Army Rangers, right after they made their own jump into Normandy.
  
The next time I saw him, he was in the hospital, unable to speak or walk after an IED nearlykilled him in Afghanistan.  But over the past five years, Cory has grown stronger, learning tospeak again and stand again and walk again.  And earlier this year, he jumped out of a planeagain.  The first words Cory said to me after his accident echoed those words first shouted allthose years ago on this beach:  “Rangers lead the way.”
So Cory has come back today, along with Melvin and Jannise and Brian, and many of theirfellow active-duty servicemembers.  We thank them for their service.  They are a reminderthat the tradition represented by these gentlemen continues.
We are on this Earth for only a moment in time.  And fewer of us have parents andgrandparents to tell us about what the veterans of D-Day did here 70 years ago.  As I waslanding on Marine One, I told my staff, I don’t think there’s a time where I miss mygrandfather more, where I’d be more happy to have him here, than this day.  So we have totell their stories for them.  We have to do our best to uphold in our own lives the values thatthey were prepared to die for.  We have to honor those who carry forward that legacy,recognizing that people cannot live in freedom unless free people are prepared to die for it.
And as today’s wars come to an end, this generation of servicemen and women will step outof uniform, and they, too, will build families and lives of their own.  They, too, will becomeleaders in their communities, in commerce, in industry, and perhaps politics -- the leaders weneed for the beachheads of our time.  And, God willing, they, too, will grow old in the landthey helped to keep free.  And someday, future generations, whether 70 or 700 years hence,will gather at places like this to honor them and to say that these were generations of menand women who proved once again that the United States of America is and will remain thegreatest force for freedom the world has ever known.
May God bless our veterans and all who served with them, including those who rest here ineternal peace.  And may God bless all who serve today for the peace and security of theworld.
May God bless the people of France.
And may God bless our United States of America.
