Tonight, I’d like to update the American people on the international effort that we have led inLibya: what we’ve done, what we plan to do, and why this matters to us.
I want to begin by paying tribute to our men and women in uniform who, once again, haveacted with courage, professionalism and patriotism.  They have moved with incredible speedand strength.  Because of them and our dedicated diplomats, a coalition has been forged andcountless lives have been saved.
Meanwhile, as we speak, our troops are supporting our ally Japan, leaving Iraq to its people,stopping the Taliban’s momentum in Afghanistan, and going after al Qaeda all across theglobe.  As Commander-in-Chief, I’m grateful to our soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, CoastGuardsmen, and to their families. And I know all Americans share in that sentiment.
For generations, the United States of America has played a unique role as an anchor of globalsecurity and as an advocate for human freedom.  Mindful of the risks and costs of militaryaction, we are naturally reluctant to use force to solve the world’s many challenges.  But whenour interests and values are at stake, we have a responsibility to act.  That’s what happenedin Libya over the course of these last six weeks. 
  
Libya sits directly between Tunisia and Egypt -- two nations that inspired the world when theirpeople rose up to take control of their own destiny.  For more than four decades, the Libyanpeople have been ruled by a tyrant -- Muammar Qaddafi.  He has denied his people freedom,exploited their wealth, murdered opponents at home and abroad, and terrorized innocentpeople around the world -- including Americans who were killed by Libyan agents.
Last month, Qaddafi’s grip of fear appeared to give way to the promise of freedom.  In citiesand towns across the country, Libyans took to the streets to claim their basic human rights. As one Libyan said, “For the first time we finally have hope that our nightmare of 40 years willsoon be over.”
Faced with this opposition, Qaddafi began attacking his people.  As President, my immediateconcern was the safety of our citizens, so we evacuated our embassy and all Americans whosought our assistance.  Then we took a series of swift steps in a matter of days to answerQaddafi’s aggression.  We froze more than $33 billion of Qaddafi’s regime’s assets.  Joiningwith other nations at the United Nations Security Council, we broadened our sanctions,imposed an arms embargo, and enabled Qaddafi and those around him to be held accountablefor their crimes.  I made it clear that Qaddafi had lost the confidence of his people and thelegitimacy to lead, and I said that he needed to step down from power.
In the face of the world’s condemnation, Qaddafi chose to escalate his attacks, launching amilitary campaign against the Libyan people.  Innocent people were targeted for killing.Hospitals and ambulances were attacked.  Journalists were arrested, sexually assaulted, andkilled.  Supplies of food and fuel were choked off.  Water for hundreds of thousands of peoplein Misurata was shut off.  Cities and towns were shelled, mosques were destroyed, andapartment buildings reduced to rubble.  Military jets and helicopter gunships were unleashedupon people who had no means to defend themselves against assaults from the air.
Confronted by this brutal repression and a looming humanitarian crisis, I ordered warshipsinto the Mediterranean.  European allies declared their willingness to commit resources to stopthe killing.  The Libyan opposition and the Arab League appealed to the world to save lives inLibya.  And so at my direction, America led an effort with our allies at the United NationsSecurity Council to pass a historic resolution that authorized a no-fly zone to stop the regime’sattacks from the air, and further authorized all necessary measures to protect the Libyanpeople.
Ten days ago, having tried to end the violence without using force, the internationalcommunity offered Qaddafi a final chance to stop his campaign of killing, or face theconsequences.  Rather than stand down, his forces continued their advance, bearing down onthe city of Benghazi, home to nearly 700,000 men, women and children who sought theirfreedom from fear.
  
At this point, the United States and the world faced a choice.  Qaddafi declared he would show“no mercy” to his own people.  He compared them to rats, and threatened to go door to doorto inflict punishment.  In the past, we have seen him hang civilians in the streets, and kill overa thousand people in a single day.  Now we saw regime forces on the outskirts of the city.  Weknew that if we wanted -- if we waited one more day, Benghazi, a city nearly the size ofCharlotte, could suffer a massacre that would have reverberated across the region and stainedthe conscience of the world.
It was not in our national interest to let that happen.  I refused to let that happen.  And sonine days ago, after consulting the bipartisan leadership of Congress, I authorized militaryaction to stop the killing and enforce U.N. Security Council Resolution 1973.
We struck regime forces approaching Benghazi to save that city and the people within it.  Wehit Qaddafi’s troops in neighboring Ajdabiya, allowing the opposition to drive them out. We hitQaddafi’s air defenses, which paved the way for a no-fly zone.  We targeted tanks and militaryassets that had been choking off towns and cities, and we cut off much of their source ofsupply.  And tonight, I can report that we have stopped Qaddafi’s deadly advance.
In this effort, the United States has not acted alone. Instead, we have been joined by a strongand growing coalition. This includes our closest allies -- nations like the United Kingdom,France, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Italy, Spain, Greece, and Turkey -- all of whom havefought by our sides for decades.  And it includes Arab partners like Qatar and the United ArabEmirates, who have chosen to meet their responsibilities to defend the Libyan people.
To summarize, then:  In just one month, the United States has worked with our internationalpartners to mobilize a broad coalition, secure an international mandate to protect civilians,stop an advancing army, prevent a massacre, and establish a no-fly zone with our allies andpartners.  To lend some perspective on how rapidly this military and diplomatic responsecame together, when people were being brutalized in Bosnia in the 1990s, it took theinternational community more than a year to intervene with air power to protect civilians.  Ittook us 31 days.
Moreover, we’ve accomplished these objectives consistent with the pledge that I made to theAmerican people at the outset of our military operations.  I said that America’s role would belimited; that we would not put ground troops into Libya; that we would focus our uniquecapabilities on the front end of the operation and that we would transfer responsibility to ourallies and partners.  Tonight, we are fulfilling that pledge.
Our most effective alliance, NATO, has taken command of the enforcement of the armsembargo and the no-fly zone.  Last night, NATO decided to take on the additionalresponsibility of protecting Libyan civilians.  This transfer from the United States to NATO willtake place on Wednesday.  Going forward, the lead in enforcing the no-fly zone and protectingcivilians on the ground will transition to our allies and partners, and I am fully confident thatour coalition will keep the pressure on Qaddafi’s remaining forces.
  
In that effort, the United States will play a supporting role -- including intelligence, logisticalsupport, search and rescue assistance, and capabilities to jam regime communications.Because of this transition to a broader, NATO-based coalition, the risk and cost of thisoperation -- to our military and to American taxpayers -- will be reduced significantly.
So for those who doubted our capacity to carry out this operation, I want to be clear:  TheUnited States of America has done what we said we would do.
That’s not to say that our work is complete.  In addition to our NATO responsibilities, we willwork with the international community to provide assistance to the people of Libya, who needfood for the hungry and medical care for the wounded.  We will safeguard the more than $33billion that was frozen from the Qaddafi regime so that it’s available to rebuild Libya.  After all,the money doesn’t belong to Qaddafi or to us -- it belongs to the Libyan people.  And we’llmake sure they receive it.
Tomorrow, Secretary Clinton will go to London, where she will meet with the Libyan oppositionand consult with more than 30 nations.  These discussions will focus on what kind of politicaleffort is necessary to pressure Qaddafi, while also supporting a transition to the future thatthe Libyan people deserve -- because while our military mission is narrowly focused on savinglives, we continue to pursue the broader goal of a Libya that belongs not to a dictator, but toits people.
Now, despite the success of our efforts over the past week, I know that some Americanscontinue to have questions about our efforts in Libya.  Qaddafi has not yet stepped down frompower, and until he does, Libya will remain dangerous.  Moreover, even after Qaddafi doesleave power, 40 years of tyranny has left Libya fractured and without strong civil institutions. The transition to a legitimate government that is responsive to the Libyan people will be adifficult task.  And while the United States will do our part to help, it will be a task for theinternational community and -- more importantly -- a task for the Libyan people themselves.
In fact, much of the debate in Washington has put forward a false choice when it comes toLibya.  On the one hand, some question why America should intervene at all -- even in limitedways -- in this distant land.  They argue that there are many places in the world whereinnocent civilians face brutal violence at the hands of their government, and America shouldnot be expected to police the world, particularly when we have so many pressing needs hereat home.
It’s true that America cannot use our military wherever repression occurs.  And given thecosts and risks of intervention, we must always measure our interests against the need foraction.  But that cannot be an argument for never acting on behalf of what’s right.  In thisparticular country -- Libya -- at this particular moment, we were faced with the prospect ofviolence on a horrific scale.
  
We had a unique ability to stop that violence:  an international mandate for action, a broadcoalition prepared to join us, the support of Arab countries, and a plea for help from theLibyan people themselves.  We also had the ability to stop Qaddafi’s forces in their trackswithout putting American troops on the ground.
To brush aside America’s responsibility as a leader and -- more profoundly -- ourresponsibilities to our fellow human beings under such circumstances would have been abetrayal of who we are.  Some nations may be able to turn a blind eye to atrocities in othercountries.  The United States of America is different.  And as President, I refused to wait forthe images of slaughter and mass graves before taking action.
Moreover, America has an important strategic interest in preventing Qaddafi from overrunningthose who oppose him.  A massacre would have driven thousands of additional refugeesacross Libya’s borders, putting enormous strains on the peaceful -- yet fragile -- transitions inEgypt and Tunisia.  The democratic impulses that are dawning across the region would beeclipsed by the darkest form of dictatorship, as repressive leaders concluded that violence isthe best strategy to cling to power.  The writ of the United Nations Security Council wouldhave been shown to be little more than empty words, crippling that institution’s futurecredibility to uphold global peace and security.  So while I will never minimize the costsinvolved in military action, I am convinced that a failure to act in Libya would have carried afar greater price for America.
Now, just as there are those who have argued against intervention in Libya, there are otherswho have suggested that we broaden our military mission beyond the task of protecting theLibyan people, and do whatever it takes to bring down Qaddafi and usher in a newgovernment.
Of course, there is no question that Libya -- and the world -- would be better off with Qaddafiout of power.  I, along with many other world leaders, have embraced that goal, and willactively pursue it through non-military means.  But broadening our military mission to includeregime change would be a mistake.
The task that I assigned our forces -- to protect the Libyan people from immediate danger,and to establish a no-fly zone -- carries with it a U.N. mandate and international support.  It’salso what the Libyan opposition asked us to do.  If we tried to overthrow Qaddafi by force, ourcoalition would splinter.  We would likely have to put U.S. troops on the ground to accomplishthat mission, or risk killing many civilians from the air.  The dangers faced by our men andwomen in uniform would be far greater.  So would the costs and our share of theresponsibility for what comes next.
To be blunt, we went down that road in Iraq.  Thanks to the extraordinary sacrifices of ourtroops and the determination of our diplomats, we are hopeful about Iraq’s future.  Butregime change there took eight years, thousands of American and Iraqi lives, and nearly atrillion dollars.  That is not something we can afford to repeat in Libya.
  
As the bulk of our military effort ratchets down, what we can do -- and will do -- is supportthe aspirations of the Libyan people.  We have intervened to stop a massacre, and we willwork with our allies and partners to maintain the safety of civilians. We will deny the regimearms, cut off its supplies of cash, assist the opposition, and work with other nations to hastenthe day when Qaddafi leaves power.  It may not happen overnight, as a badly weakenedQaddafi tries desperately to hang on to power.  But it should be clear to those around Qaddafi,and to every Libyan, that history is not on Qaddafi’s side.  With the time and space that wehave provided for the Libyan people, they will be able to determine their own destiny, andthat is how it should be. 
Let me close by addressing what this action says about the use of America’s military power,and America’s broader leadership in the world, under my presidency.
As Commander-in-Chief, I have no greater responsibility than keeping this country safe.  Andno decision weighs on me more than when to deploy our men and women in uniform.  I’vemade it clear that I will never hesitate to use our military swiftly, decisively, and unilaterallywhen necessary to defend our people, our homeland, our allies and our core interests.  That'swhy we’re going after al Qaeda wherever they seek a foothold.  That is why we continue tofight in Afghanistan, even as we have ended our combat mission in Iraq and removed morethan 100,000 troops from that country. 
There will be times, though, when our safety is not directly threatened, but our interests andour values are.  Sometimes, the course of history poses challenges that threaten our commonhumanity and our common security -- responding to natural disasters, for example; orpreventing genocide and keeping the peace; ensuring regional security, and maintaining theflow of commerce.  These may not be America’s problems alone, but they are important tous.  They’re problems worth solving.  And in these circumstances, we know that the UnitedStates, as the world’s most powerful nation, will often be called upon to help.
In such cases, we should not be afraid to act -- but the burden of action should not beAmerica’s alone.  As we have in Libya, our task is instead to mobilize the internationalcommunity for collective action.  Because contrary to the claims of some, American leadershipis not simply a matter of going it alone and bearing all of the burden ourselves.  Realleadership creates the conditions and coalitions for others to step up as well; to work withallies and partners so that they bear their share of the burden and pay their share of thecosts; and to see that the principles of justice and human dignity are upheld by all.
That’s the kind of leadership we’ve shown in Libya.  Of course, even when we act as part of acoalition, the risks of any military action will be high.  Those risks were realized when one ofour planes malfunctioned over Libya.  Yet when one of our airmen parachuted to the ground,in a country whose leader has so often demonized the United States -- in a region that hassuch a difficult history with our country -- this American did not find enemies.  Instead, hewas met by people who embraced him.  One young Libyan who came to his aid said, “We areyour friends.  We are so grateful to those men who are protecting the skies.”
  
This voice is just one of many in a region where a new generation is refusing to be deniedtheir rights and opportunities any longer. 
Yes, this change will make the world more complicated for a time.  Progress will be uneven,and change will come differently to different countries.  There are places, like Egypt, wherethis change will inspire us and raise our hopes.  And then there will be places, like Iran, wherechange is fiercely suppressed.  The dark forces of civil conflict and sectarian war will have tobe averted, and difficult political and economic concerns will have to be addressed. 
The United States will not be able to dictate the pace and scope of this change.  Only thepeople of the region can do that. But we can make a difference. 
I believe that this movement of change cannot be turned back, and that we must standalongside those who believe in the same core principles that have guided us through manystorms:  our opposition to violence directed at one’s own people; our support for a set ofuniversal rights, including the freedom for people to express themselves and choose theirleaders; our support for governments that are ultimately responsive to the aspirations of thepeople.
Born, as we are, out of a revolution by those who longed to be free, we welcome the fact thathistory is on the move in the Middle East and North Africa, and that young people are leadingthe way.  Because wherever people long to be free, they will find a friend in the UnitedStates.  Ultimately, it is that faith -- those ideals -- that are the true measure of Americanleadership.
My fellow Americans, I know that at a time of upheaval overseas -- when the news is filledwith conflict and change -- it can be tempting to turn away from the world.  And as I’ve saidbefore, our strength abroad is anchored in our strength here at home.  That must always beour North Star -- the ability of our people to reach their potential, to make wise choices withour resources, to enlarge the prosperity that serves as a wellspring for our power, and to livethe values that we hold so dear.
But let us also remember that for generations, we have done the hard work of protecting ourown people, as well as millions around the globe.  We have done so because we know that ourown future is safer, our own future is brighter, if more of mankind can live with the brightlight of freedom and dignity. 
Tonight, let us give thanks for the Americans who are serving through these trying times, andthe coalition that is carrying our effort forward.  And let us look to the future with confidenceand hope not only for our own country, but for all those yearning for freedom around theworld.
Thank you.  God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.
