Good evening. Pause for laughter. Wait a minute, this may not be working as well as I -- Letme try that again. Good evening, everybody. I would like to welcome you all to the 10-day anniversary of myfirst 100 days. I am Barack Obama. Most of you covered me. All of you voted for me.Apologies to the Fox table. They're -- Where are they? I have to confess I really did not wantto be here tonight, but I knew I had to come -- just one more problem that I've inherited fromGeorge W. Bush.But now that I'm here, it's great to be here. It's great to see all of you. Michelle Obama ishere, the First Lady of the United States. Hasn't she been an outstanding First Lady? She'seven begun to bridge the differences that have divided us for so long, because no matterwhich party you belong to we can all agree that Michelle has the right to bare arms.Now Sasha and Malia aren't here tonight because they're grounded. You can't just take AirForce One on a joy ride to Manhattan. I don't care whose kids you are. We've been settingsome ground rules here. They're starting to get a little carried away. 

Now, speaking -- when I think about children obviously I think about Michelle and it remindsme that tomorrow is Mother's Day. Happy Mother's Day to all the mothers in the audience. Ido have to say, though, that this is a tough holiday for Rahm Emanuel because he's not usedto saying the word "day" after "mother." That's true.David Axelrod is here. You know, David and I have been together for a long time. I can stillremember -- I got to sort of -- I tear up a little bit when I think back to that day that I calledAx so many years ago and said, you and I can do wonderful things together. And he said tome the same thing that partners all across America are saying to one another right now: Let'sgo to Iowa and make it official.Michael Steele is in the house tonight. Or as he would say, "in the heezy." What's up? Whereis Michael? Michael, for the last time, the Republican Party does not qualify for a bailout. RushLimbaugh does not count as a troubled asset, I'm sorry.Dick Cheney was supposed to be here but he is very busy working on his memoirs, tentativelytitled, "How to Shoot Friends and Interrogate People."You know, it's been a whirlwind of activity these first hundred days. We've enacted a majoreconomic recovery package, we passed a budget, we forged a new path in Iraq, and noPresident in history has ever named three Commerce Secretaries this quickly. Which remindsme, if Judd Gregg is here, your business cards are ready now.On top of that, I've also reversed the ban on stem cell research, signed an expansion --signed an expansion of the children's health insurance. Just last week, Car and Driver namedme auto executive of the year. Something I'm very proud of.We've also begun to change the culture in Washington. We've even made the White House aplace where people can learn and can grow. Just recently, Larry Summers asked if he couldchair the White House Council on Women and Girls. And I do appreciate that Larry is heretonight because it is seven hours past his bedtime. Gibbs liked that one. In the last hundred days, we've also grown the Democratic Party by infusing it with newenergy and bringing in fresh, young faces like Arlen Specter. Now, Joe Biden rightly deservesa lot of credit for convincing Arlen to make the switch, but Secretary Clinton actually had a lotto do with it too. One day she just pulled him aside and she said, Arlen, you know what Ialways say -- "if you can't beat them, join them." Which brings me to another thing that's changed in this new, warmer, fuzzier White House,and that's my relationship with Hillary. You know, we had been rivals during the campaign,but these days we could not be closer. In fact, the second she got back from Mexico shepulled into a hug and gave me a big kiss. Told me I'd better get down there myself. Which Ireally appreciated. I mean, it was -- it was nice.

And of course we've also begun to change America's image in the world. We talked about thisduring this campaign and we're starting to execute. We've renewed alliances with importantpartners and friends. If you look on the screen there, there I am with Japanese Prime MinisterTaro Aso. There I am with Gordon Brown. But as I said during the campaign, we can't just talk to our friends. As hard as it is, we alsohave to talk to our enemies, and I've begun to do exactly that. Take a look at the monitorthere. Now, let me be clear, just because he handed me a copy of Peter Pan does not meanthat I'm going to read it -- but it's good diplomatic practice to just accept these gifts.All this change hasn't been easy. Change never is. So I've cut the tension by bringing a newfriend to the White House. He's warm, he's cuddly, loyal, enthusiastic. You just have to keephim on a tight leash. Every once in a while he goes charging off in the wrong direction andgets himself into trouble. But enough about Joe Biden.
All in all, we're proud of the change we've brought to Washington in these first hundred daysbut we've got a lot of work left to do, as all of you know. So I'd like to talk a little bit aboutwhat my administration plans to achieve in the next hundred days.During the second hundred days, we will design, build and open a library dedicated to my firsthundred days. It's going to be big, folks. In the next hundred days, I will learn to go off theprompter and Joe Biden will learn to stay on the prompter.
In the next hundred days, our bipartisan outreach will be so successful that even JohnBoehner will consider becoming a Democrat. After all, we have a lot in common. He is aperson of color. Although not a color that appears in the natural world. What's up, John?In the next hundred days, I will meet with a leader who rules over millions with an iron fist,who owns the airwaves and uses his power to crush all who would challenge his authority atthe ballot box. It's good to see you, Mayor Bloomberg. 
In the next hundred days, we will housetrain our dog, Bo, because the last thing Tim Geithnerneeds is someone else treating him like a fire hydrant. In the next hundred days, I willstrongly consider losing my cool.Finally, I believe that my next hundred days will be so successful I will be able to completethem in 72 days. And on the 73rd day, I will rest. I just -- I want to end by saying a few words about the men and women in this room whosejob it is to inform the public and pursue the truth. You know, we meet tonight at a moment ofextraordinary challenge for this nation and for the world, but it's also a time of real hardshipfor the field of journalism. And like so many other businesses in this global age, you've seensweeping changes and technology and communications that lead to a sense of uncertainty andanxiety about what the future will hold.

Across the country, there are extraordinary, hardworking journalists who have lost their jobsin recent days, recent weeks, recent months. And I know that each newspaper and mediaoutlet is wrestling with how to respond to these changes, and some are struggling simply tostay open. And it won't be easy. Not every ending will be a happy one. But it's also true that your ultimate success as an industry is essential to the success of ourdemocracy. It's what makes this thing work. You know, Thomas Jefferson once said that if hehad the choice between a government without newspapers, or newspapers without agovernment, he would not hesitate to choose the latter. Clearly, Thomas Jefferson never had cable news to contend with -- but his central pointremains: A government without newspapers, a government without a tough and vibrantmedia of all sorts, is not an option for the United States of America.So I may not -- I may not agree with everything you write or report. I may even complain, ormore likely Gibbs will complain, from time to time about how you do your jobs, but I do sowith the knowledge that when you are at your best, then you help me be at my best. You helpall of us who serve at the pleasure of the American people do our jobs better by holding usaccountable, by demanding honesty, by preventing us from taking shortcuts and falling intoeasy political games that people are so desperately weary of. And that kind of reporting is worth preserving -- not just for your sake, but for the public's.We count on you to help us make sense of a complex world and tell the stories of our lives theway they happen, and we look for you for truth, even if it's always an approximation, even if -
- This is a season of renewal and reinvention. That is what government must learn to do, that'swhat businesses must learn to do, and that's what journalism is in the process of doing. Andwhen I look out at this room and think about the dedicated men and women whose questionsI've answered over the last few years, I know that for all the challenges this industry faces,it's not short on talent or creativity or passion or commitment. It's not short of young peoplewho are eager to break news or the not-so-young who still manage to ask the tough onestime and time again. These qualities alone will not solve all your problems, but they certainlyprove that the problems are worth solving. And that is a good place as any to begin.So I offer you my thanks, I offer you my support, and I look forward to working with you andanswering to you and the American people as we seek a more perfect union in the monthsand years ahead.Thank you very much, everybody.
Thank you.