Thank you!  Everybody, please have a set.
To Leader Reid, to Steny Hoyer, John Larson, Xavier Becerra, Jim Clyburn, Chris Van Hollen,to an extraordinary leader and extraordinary Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, and to allthe members here today, thank you very much for having me.  Thanks for having me andthanks for your tireless efforts waged on behalf of health insurance reform in this country.  
I have the great pleasure of having a really nice library at the White House.  And I was toolingthrough some of the writings of some previous Presidents and I came upon this quote byAbraham Lincoln:  “I am not bound to win, but I’m bound to be true.  I’m not bound tosucceed, but I’m bound to live up to what light I have.”
This debate has been a difficult debate.  This process has been a difficult process.  And thisyear has been a difficult year for the American people.  When I was sworn in, we were in themidst of the worst recession since the Great Depression.  Eight hundred thousand people permonth were losing their jobs.  Millions of people were losing their health insurance.  And thefinancial system was on the verge of collapse.
And this body has taken on some of the toughest votes and some of the toughest decisions inthe history of Congress.  Not because you were bound to win, but because you were bound tobe true.  Because each and every one of you made a decision that at a moment of suchurgency, it was less important to measure what the polls said than to measure what wasright.
  
A year later, we’re in different circumstances.  Because of the actions that you’ve taken, thefinancial system has stabilized.  The stock market has stabilized.  Businesses are starting toinvest again.  The economy, instead of contracting, is now growing again.  There are signsthat people are going to start hiring again.  There’s still tremendous hardship all across thecountry, but there is a sense that we are making progress -- because of you.
But even before this crisis, each and every one of us knew that there were millions of peopleacross America who were living their own quiet crises.  Maybe because they had a child whohad a preexisting condition and no matter how desperate they were, no matter whatinsurance company they called, they couldn’t get coverage for that child.  Maybe it wassomebody who had been forced into early retirement, in their 50s not yet eligible forMedicare, and they couldn’t find a job and they couldn’t find health insurance, despite the factthat they had some sort of chronic condition that had to be tended to.
Every single one of you at some point before you arrived in Congress and after you arrived inCongress have met constituents with heart-breaking stories.  And you’ve looked them in theeye and you’ve said, we’re going to do something about it -- that’s why I want to go toCongress.  
And now, we’re on the threshold of doing something about it.  We’re a day away.  After a yearof debate, after every argument has been made, by just about everybody, we’re 24 hoursaway.  
As some of you know, I’m not somebody who spends a lot of time surfing the cable channels,but I’m not completely in the bubble.  I have a sense of what the coverage has been, andmostly it’s an obsession with “What will this mean for the Democratic Party?  What will thismean for the President’s polls?  How will this play out in November?  Is this good or is this badfor the Democratic majority?  What does it mean for those swing districts?”  
And I noticed that there’s been a lot of friendly advice offered all across town.  MitchMcConnell, John Boehner, Karl Rove -- they’re all warning you of the horrendous impact if yousupport this legislation.  Now, it could be that they are suddenly having a change of heart andthey are deeply concerned about their Democratic friends. They are giving you the bestpossible advice in order to assure that Nancy Pelosi remains Speaker and Harry Reid remainsLeader and that all of you keep your seats.  That’s a possibility. 
But it may also be possible that they realize after health reform passes and I sign thatlegislation into law, that it’s going to be a little harder to mischaracterize what this effort hasbeen all about.  
Because this year, small businesses will start getting tax credits so that they can offer healthinsurance to employees who currently don’t have it. Because this year, those same parentswho are worried about getting coverage for their children with preexisting conditions now areassured that insurance companies have to give them coverage -- this year.  
  
Because this year, insurance companies won’t suddenly be able to drop your coverage whenyou get sick -- or impose lifetime limits or restrictive limits on the coverage that you have. Maybe they know that this year, for the first time, young people will be able to stay on theirparents’ health insurance until they’re 26 years old and they’re thinking that just might bepopular all across the country.
And what they also know is what won’t happen.  They know that after this legislation passesand after I sign this bill, lo and behold nobody is pulling the plug on Granny. It turns out thatin fact people who like their health insurance are going to be able to keep their healthinsurance; that there’s no government takeover.  People will discover that if they like theirdoctor, they’ll be keeping their doctor.  In fact, they’re more likely to keep their doctorbecause of a stronger system.
It’ll turn out that this piece of historic legislation is built on the private insurance system thatwe have now and runs straight down the center of American political thought.  It turns outthis is a bill that tracks the recommendations not just of Democrat Tom Daschle, but alsoRepublicans Bob Dole and Howard Baker; that this is a middle-of-the-road bill that is designedto help the American people in an area of their lives where they urgently need help.
Now, there are some who wanted a single-payer government-run system.  That’s not this bill. The Republicans wanted what I called the “foxes guard the henhouse approach” in which wefurther deregulate the insurance companies and let them run wild, the notion being somehowthat that was going to lower costs for the American people.  I don’t know a serious health careeconomist who buys that idea, but that was their concept.  And we rejected that, becausewhat we said was we want to create a system in which health care is working not forinsurance companies but it’s working for the American people, it’s working for middle classfamilies.
So what did we do?  What is the essence of this legislation?  Number one, this is the toughestinsurance reforms in history. We are making sure that the system of private insurance worksfor ordinary families.  A prescription -- this is a patient’s bill of rights on steroids.  So many ofyou individually have worked on these insurance reforms -- they are in this package -- tomake sure that families are getting a fair deal; that if they’re paying a premium, that they’regetting a good service in return; making sure that employers, if they are paying premiums fortheir employees, that their employees are getting the coverage that they expect; thatinsurance companies are not going to game the system with fine print and rescissions anddropping people when they need it most, but instead are going to have to abide by some basicrules of the road that exemplify a sense of fairness and good value.  That’s number one.
The second thing this does is it creates a pool, a marketplace, where individuals and smallbusinesses, who right now are having a terrible time out there getting health insurance, aregoing to be able to purchase health insurance as part of a big group -- just like federalemployees, just like members of Congress.  They are now going to be part of a pool that cannegotiate for better rates, better quality, more competition.  
  
And that’s why the Congressional Budget Office says this will lower people’s rates forcomparable plans by 14 to 20 percent. That’s not my numbers -- that’s the CongressionalBudget Office’s numbers.  So that people will have choice and competition just like membersof Congress have choice and competition.
Number three, if people still can’t afford it we’re going to provide them some tax credits -- thebiggest tax cut for small businesses and working families when it comes to health care inhistory.
And number four, this is the biggest reduction in our deficit since the Budget Balance Act --one of the biggest deficit reduction measures in history -- over $1.3 trillion that will help putus on the path of fiscal responsibility.
And that’s before we count all the game-changing measures that are going to assure, forexample, that instead of having five tests when you go to the doctor you just get one; thatthe delivery system is working for patients, not just working for billings.  And everybody who’slooked at it says that every single good idea to bend the cost curve and start actually reducinghealth care costs are in this bill.
So that’s what this effort is all about.  Toughest insurance reforms in history.  A marketplaceso people have choice and competition who right now don’t have it and are seeing theirpremiums go up 20, 30, 40, 50 percent.  Reductions in the cost of health care for millions ofAmerican families, including those who have health insurance.  The Business Roundtable didtheir own study and said that this would potentially save employers $3,000 per employee ontheir health care because of the measures in this legislation.  
And by the way, not only does it reduce the deficit -- we pay for it responsibly in ways thatthe other side of the aisle that talks a lot about fiscal responsibility but doesn’t seem to beable to walk the walk can’t claim when it comes to their prescription drug bill.  We are actuallydoing it.  This is paid for and will not add a dime to the deficit -- it will reduce the deficit.
Now, is this bill perfect?  Of course not.  Will this solve every single problem in our health caresystem right away?  No.  There are all kinds of ideas that many of you have that aren’tincluded in this legislation.  I know that there has been discussion, for example, of how we’regoing to deal with regional disparities and I know that there was a meeting with SecretarySebelius to assure that we can continue to try to make sure that we’ve got a system thatgives people the best bang for their buck.
So this is not -- there are all kinds of things that many of you would like to see that isn’t inthis legislation.  There are some things I’d like to see that’s not in this legislation.  But is thisthe single most important step that we have taken on health care since Medicare? Absolutely.  Is this the most important piece of domestic legislation in terms of giving a breakto hardworking middle class families out there since Medicare?  Absolutely.  Is this a vastimprovement over the status quo?  Absolutely.
  
Now, I still know this is a tough vote, though.  I know this is a tough vote.  I’ve talked tomany of you individually.  And I have to say that if you honestly believe in your heart ofhearts, in your conscience, that this is not an improvement over the status quo; if despite allthe information that’s out there that says that without serious reform efforts like this onepeople’s premiums are going to double over the next five or 10 years, that folks are going tokeep on getting letters from their insurance companies saying that their premium just went up40 or 50 percent; if you think that somehow it’s okay that we have millions of hardworkingAmericans who can’t get health care and that it’s all right, it’s acceptable, in the wealthiestnation on Earth that there are children with chronic illnesses that can’t get the care that theyneed -- if you think that the system is working for ordinary Americans rather than theinsurance companies, then you should vote no on this bill.  If you can honestly say that, thenyou shouldn’t support it.  You’re here to represent your constituencies and if you think yourconstituencies honestly wouldn’t be helped, you shouldn’t vote for this.
But if you agree that the system is not working for ordinary families, if you’ve heard the samestories that I’ve heard everywhere, all across the country, then help us fix this system.  Don'tdo it for me.  Don’t do it for Nancy Pelosi or Harry Reid.  Do it for all those people out therewho are struggling.  
Some of you know I get 10 letters a day that I read out of the 40,000 that we receive. Started reading some of the ones that I got this morning.  “Dear President Obama, mydaughter, a wonderful person, lost her job.  She has no health insurance.  She had a bloodclot in her brain.  She’s now disabled, can’t get care.”  “Dear President Obama, I don’t yetqualify for Medicare.  COBRA is about to run out.  I am desperate, don't know what to do.”
Do it for them.  Do it for people who are really scared right now through no fault of their own,who’ve played by the rules, who’ve done all the right things, and have suddenly found outthat because of an accident, because of an ailment, they’re about to lose their house; or theycan’t provide the help to their kids that they need; or they’re a small business who up untilnow has always taken pride in providing care for their workers and it turns out that they justcan’t afford to do it anymore and they’ve having to make a decision about do I keep providinghealth insurance for my workers or do I just drop their coverage or do I not hire some peoplebecause I simply can’t afford it -- it’s all being gobbled up by the insurance companies.
Don’t do it for me.  Don’t do it for the Democratic Party.  Do it for the American people. They’re the ones who are looking for action right now.
I know this is a tough vote.  And I am actually confident -- I’ve talked to some of youindividually -- that it will end up being the smart thing to do politically because I believe thatgood policy is good politics.  I am convinced that when you go out there and you are standingtall and you are saying I believe that this is the right thing to do for my constituents and theright thing to do for America, that ultimately the truth will out.
  
I had a wonderful conversation with Betsy Markey.  I don't know if Betsy is around here. There she is right there.  Betsy is in a tough district.  The biggest newspaper is somewhatconservative, as Betsy described.  They weren’t real happy with health care reform.  Theywere opposed to it.  Betsy, despite the pressure, announced that she was in favor of this bill. And lo and behold, the next day that same newspaper runs an editorial saying, you knowwhat, we’ve considered this, we’ve looked at the legislation, and we actually are pleased thatCongresswoman Markey is supporting the legislation.
When I see John Boccieri stand up proud with a whole bunch of his constituencies -- in astough a district as there is and stand up with a bunch of folks from his district with preexistingconditions and saying, you know, I don’t know what is going on Washington but I know what’sgoing on with these families -- I look at him with pride.
Now, I can’t guarantee that this is good politics.  Every one of you know your districts betterthan I do.  You talk to folks.  You’re under enormous pressure.  You’re getting robocalls. You’re getting e-mails that are tying up the communications system.  I know the pressureyou’re under.  I get a few comments made about me.  I don’t know if you’ve noticed.  I’vebeen in your shoes.  I know what it’s like to take a tough vote.
But what did Lincoln say?  “I am not bound to win, but I am bound to be true.”  Twogenerations ago, folks who were sitting in your position, they made a decision -- we are goingto make sure that seniors and the poor have health care coverage that they can count on. And they did the right thing.  
And I’m sure at the time they were making that vote, they weren’t sure how the politics wereeither, any more than the people who made the decision to make sure that Social Securitywas in place knew how the politics would play out, or folks who passed the civil rights actsknew how the politics were going to play out.  They were not bound to win, but they werebound to be true.
And now we’ve got middle class Americans, don’t have Medicare, don’t have Medicaid,watching the employer-based system fray along the edges or being caught in terriblesituations.  And the question is, are we going to be true to them?  
Sometimes I think about how I got involved in politics.  I didn’t think of myself as a potentialpolitician when I get out of college.  I went to work in neighborhoods, working with Catholicchurches in poor neighborhoods in Chicago, trying to figure out how people could get a littlebit of help.  And I was skeptical about politics and politicians, just like a lot of Americans areskeptical about politics and politicians are right now.  Because my working assumption waswhen push comes to shove, all too often folks in elected office, they’re looking for themselvesand not looking out for the folks who put them there; that there are too many compromises;that the special interests have too much power; they just got too much clout; there’s toomuch big money washing around.
  
And I decided finally to get involved because I realized if I wasn’t willing to step up and betrue to the things I believe in, then the system wouldn’t change.  Every single one of you hadthat same kind of moment at the beginning of your careers.  Maybe it was just listening tostories in your neighborhood about what was happening to people who’d been laid off ofwork.  Maybe it was your own family experience, somebody got sick and didn’t have healthcare and you said something should change.  
Something inspired you to get involved, and something inspired you to be a Democrat insteadof running as a Republican.  Because somewhere deep in your heart you said to yourself, Ibelieve in an America in which we don’t just look out for ourselves, that we don’t just tellpeople you’re on your own, that we are proud of our individualism, we are proud of ourliberty, but we also have a sense of neighborliness and a sense of community -- and we arewilling to look out for one another and help people who are vulnerable and help people whoare down on their luck and give them a pathway to success and give them a ladder into themiddle class.  That’s why you decided to run.
And now a lot of us have been here a while and everybody here has taken their lumps andtheir bruises.  And it turns out people have had to make compromises, and you’ve been awayfrom families for a long time and you’ve missed special events for your kids sometimes.  Andmaybe there have been times where you asked yourself, why did I ever get involved in politicsin the first place?  And maybe things can’t change after all.  And when you do somethingcourageous, it turns out sometimes you may be attacked.  And sometimes the very peopleyou thought you were trying to help may be angry at you and shout at you.  And you say toyourself, maybe that thing that I started with has been lost.  
But you know what?  Every once in a while, every once in a while a moment comes where youhave a chance to vindicate all those best hopes that you had about yourself, about thiscountry, where you have a chance to make good on those promises that you made in all thosetown meetings and all those constituency breakfasts and all that traveling through the district,all those people who you looked in the eye and you said, you know what, you’re right, thesystem is not working for you and I’m going to make it a little bit better.  
And this is one of those moments.  This is one of those times where you can honestly say toyourself, doggone it, this is exactly why I came here.  This is why I got into politics.  This iswhy I got into public service.  This is why I’ve made those sacrifices.  Because I believe sodeeply in this country and I believe so deeply in this democracy and I’m willing to stand upeven when it’s hard, even when it’s tough.
Every single one of you have made that promise not just to your constituents but to yourself. And this is the time to make true on that promise.  We are not bound to win, but we arebound to be true.  We are not bound to succeed, but we are bound to let whatever light wehave shine.  We have been debating health care for decades.  It has now been debated for ayear.
  
It is in your hands.  It is time to pass health care reform for America, and I am confident thatyou are going to do it tomorrow.
Thank you very much, House of Representatives.  Let’s get this done.
