I would just like to say that there have been those who have been saying that there is tensionbetween the United States and the National League for Democracy -- or perhaps with me. Iwould like to make quite clear that the friendship between the United States and those whohave been struggling for democracy in Burma is a very strong one.  We may view thingsdifferently from time to time but it will in no way affect our friendship.
And I have absolute confidence that the United States will continue to support us with regardto the democratic transformation and that when Burma becomes a fully functioningdemocracy in accordance with the will of the people, we will be able to say that among thosefriends who enabled us to get there, the United States was among the first.
So please don't think -- please don't worry that there will be any problems between the UnitedStates and those working for democracy in Burma.  We all believe in the same values.  We allbelieve in the same principles.  We may sometimes think that there are different ways ofgetting to the goal that we wish to achieve, but these differences are part of the democratictradition.  Democracy allows people to have different views, and democracy makes it also --makes us also responsible for negotiating an answer to those views.
  
I would like all of you to feel welcome in this country, and I would all -- like all of you to feelthat you can join us in hoping for better days.  But at the same time, I always warn againstover-optimism because that could lead to complacency.
Our reform process is going through, let’s us say, a bumpy...patch.  But this bumpy patch issomething that we can negotiate with commitment and with the help and understanding ofour friends from all over the world.  So let us not exaggerate the differences, the difficulties. But at the same time, let us not exaggerate the rosy picture either.
What we need is a healthy balance between optimism and pessimism.  We need to view the --the situation for what it was.  But at the same time, we all have to be confident that we willget there -- we will get where we want to get to, because that’s what our people want.  In theend, it’s the people of Burma who will decide where this country is going to and which wayand how and when.
So we accept responsibility for the fate of our country, but at the same time we welcome thesupport and the help of our friends.  And we always appreciate them very greatly.
Thank you.
Barack Obama:  Well, good afternoon, everybody.  Mingalaba.  It is wonderful to be back inRangoon and to once more have the opportunity to spend time with Aung San Suu Kyi.  As weknow, it was in this house that she endured years of confinement -- never giving up hope,never wavering in her determination to build a free and democratic Burma.  Daw Suu, youhelped set this country on a better path.  I’m grateful for your friendship and for thehospitality that you’ve shown in opening your home up not only to me, but to all these people.
When I made my first historic visit to Burma, this country was just taking preliminary stepstowards democracy.  And in the past two years, important changes have been made.  Theeconomy has begun to grow.  Political prisoners have been set free.  There are morenewspapers and media outlets.  Children have been released from the military.  And these areall important changes that have opened up greater opportunity for the people of Burma.
At the same time, as Aung San Suu Kyi just said, it’s clear how much hard work remains to bedone and that many difficult choices still lie ahead.  The process for reform is by no meanscomplete or irreversible.  For many, progress has not come fast enough or spread farenough.  People need to feel safe in their homes and not be subject to arbitrary harassmentby authorities or individuals acting with impunity.  People need to be empowered to pursuetheir dreams.  And as Burma approaches important national elections next year, it will becritical to ensure that all of Burma’s people can participate in shaping the future of theircountry.
  
As a member of parliament and the head of the rule of law committee, Aung San Suu Kyi isworking hard to make government more transparent, more accountable, to protect the rightsof all the Burmese people, to promote reforms that would expand the political space for morepeople to contribute their voices.  But implementing the major political and economic reformsthat are necessary to keep Burma advancing toward democracy is going to take a great dealof political will and no small amount of determination.  And we, as friends of the Burmesepeople, are clear-eyed about the scale of the challenges that remain, and recognize that wecannot remain complacent.
Today, Daw Suu and I had a wide-ranging discussion about how the United States can helpfacilitate and bolster Burma’s democratic transition.  We talked about the need for strongerrule of law, for elections that are free, fair and inclusive, and for continued constitutionalchanges that will move Burma more fully towards a civilian government.
We spoke about how we can work together to promote national reconciliation and defusesectarian tensions among Burma’s diverse ethnic groups.  Specifically, I stressed the need tofind durable and effective solutions for the terrible violence in Rakhine state -- solutions thatend discrimination, provide greater security and economic opportunities, protect all citizens,and promote greater tolerance and understanding.  Strengthening human rights protectionsfor all of Burma’s people is an essential step to realizing the vision we share for the future ofthis beautiful country.
The last time I stood here, I made a pledge to the people of Burma -- that if we continued tosee progress toward reform, the ties between our countries would grow stronger, and theUnited States would continue to do whatever it could to help ensure Burma’s success.  Overthe last two years, I think we’ve made good on that pledge, and I want to reiterate thecommitment to match continued reforms with greater support and friendships in the future.
We’re committed to working directly with the people of Burma, and not just the government. So later today, I’m looking forward to speaking with representatives of Burma’s civil societygroups and with young leaders from Burma and all across Southeast Asia who are working tocreate greater opportunities for themselves and for future generations.  I think these newvoices are going to be critical to making sure that reforms are sustainable and meaningful topeople across the country and across the region.
So, Daw Suu, thank you again for welcoming us here today.  We continue to look to you forinspiration as well as resolve, and I know that you will continue to be a fierce advocate onbehalf of the people of Burma, a future of democracy, and I know that you will be a strongpartner with the United States.
Thank you.  Questions?
  
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi:  Who’s speaking?
Barack Obama: I’ll go first.  Christi Parsons.
Q:  You have been traveling in countries with long histories of repressing freedom ofexpression and censorship.  And it was interesting yesterday that President Xi seemed to besaying that reporters who have problems have themselves to blame.  And so I wonder to whatextent you feel the need to contend with these ideas with leaders in this region as you travel. And what do you say to them?  And by way of example, I might ask you -- Attorney GeneralEric Holder says no journalist will go to prison for doing his or her job, on his watch. And so Iask about the case of James Risen, the journalist who is facing this prosecution for notrevealing his source in a leak prosecution.  I wonder if that’s -- are you speaking specificallyabout this case, and is that your position as well?
And if I may, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, ask you -- how concerned are you about the violenceagainst ethnic minorities in your country, and specifically the Rohingya people?  And what doyou believe is your responsibility to speak out about it?  Thank you very much. 
Barack Obama:  The issue of press freedom is a constant concern in my interactions with theChinese government.  It’s an issue that I’ve raised with the President here in Burma.  I’mpretty blunt and pretty frank about the fact that societies that repress journalists ultimatelyoppress people as well, and that if you want a society that is free and vibrant and successful,part of that formula is the free flow of information, of ideas, and that requires a free press. That is part of our tradition.
As I explained to President Xi in China, it’s in our DNA.  We believe in the primacy individualsbeing able to pursue their dreams, endowed with certain inalienable rights.  And we believethat when governments censor or control information, that ultimately that undermines notonly the society, but it leads to eventual encroachments on individual rights as well.
I can't comment, Christi, on any particular pending case, as you know -- that's sort of an iron-
clad rule -- or any particular prosecution.  I can read back to you what Attorney GeneralHolder has said, which is no journalist is going to go to jail for doing their job.  And I don'tthink you're suggesting that there's -- that the two cases are comparable.  But I recognizethat in our own society we have to constantly balance the need for certain national securityissues to remain secret with journalists pursuing leads wherever they can. 
And the good news is, is that we've got courts and we've got a First Amendment.  And we gota whole bunch of tools to ensure that that balance is properly debated and adjudicated. 
But I think that when I am traveling, it is important as the President of the United States tonot just talk about our interests, but also to talk about our values.  Sometimes it has animpact; sometimes it doesn't.  Although I was impressed that Mark Landler got an answer tohis question from President Xi.
  
It might not have been the one he was expecting, but he did end up taking the question.  Soyou just keep on chipping away and seeing if we can make progress.
Q: [Off-mic inaudible]
Barack Obama:  Hold on a second, Christi.  Don't try to segue into a second question. 
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi:  I think I better take over because I've got to have my time as well.
Barack Obama:  There you go.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi:  The National League for Democracy always has been againstviolence of any kind, either on racial grounds, or religious grounds, or ideological grounds. We do not believe that violence really resolves anything at all.
Our struggle for democracy has been carried out with a strong grasp on the principle ofnonviolence.  And also, we believe in the rule of law.  So if you ask how do we propose toresolve all of these problems of violence between communities, between different ethnicgroups, we've got to start with rule of law.  People have to feel secure before they can starttalking to one another.  We cannot achieve harmony without security.  People who feelthreatened are not going to sit down and sort out their problems.
So I would like to recommend, as the chair of the Rule of Law and Tranquility Committee --don't forget that tranquility is also included -- that the government should look to rule of law. It is the duty of the government to make all our people feel secure, and it is the duty of ourpeople to learn to live in harmony with one another.
If we want democracy, we have to be prepared to live by the principles of democracy.  Wehave to dare to live according to the principles of democracy.  I think we'll get there, but it willtake us some time.  But we will remain fully committed to the principle of nonviolence.
Q:  [inaudible] Mr. President, I'd like to know about the Myanmar reforms.  You've beentalking with the President and parliament speakers, and also you're going to talk with the civilsocieties group, and then youth.  So my direct question to you is that:  Have you got anyspecific agreement with the Myanmar government or President Thein Sein about Myanmarreforms such as constitutional change, and peace negotiation, peace process, and also 2015general election?
And also to Daw Aung San Sui Kyi, you have got a one-hour discussion with the President,and at the current political situation, as you said, it’s a bumpy situation.  So if you didn't makeamendment, or you didn't change constitution, the NLD and you, yourself, is going to be verydifficult after 2015 elections.  So have you talked about those issues with the President?  Orthe President talk to you about U.S. support for you?  Thank you.
  
Barack Obama:  Well, the issue of making sure that reforms and the transition is fullyrealized was the main topic of our conversation and the main topic of my conversation withthe President last night.
As I indicated before, there are signs of progress.  We shouldn't deny that Burma today is notthe same as Burma five years ago.  But the process is still incomplete.  And I was veryspecific with the President in terms of how we will measure whether or not the transition hasbeen fully realized. 
Number one, we expect elections to take place on time.  We do not want to see delays,because it's time for the voice of the people of Burma to be heard in a fair, free, transparentelection.
Number two, I indicated to the President that the constitution amendment process needs toreflect inclusion rather than exclusion, that there are certain provisions in the Burmeseconstitution that objectively don't make much sense.  Ultimately, what changes are made areup to the people of Burma.  But, for example, I don't understand a provision that would barsomebody from running for President because of who their children are.  That doesn't makemuch sense to me.
Number three, we are very much in favor of the peace process, and I encourage the Presidentto move forward in the negotiations.  He expressed some optimism about the ability to bring adeal to a conclusion.  But as Daw Suu has indicated, you have to be skeptical until it's actuallydone. 
Number four, I indicated that we are paying attention to how religious minorities are treatedin this country.  Now, I recognize the complexities of the situation in Rakhine state.  On theother hand, consistent with what Daw Suu just said, I am a firm believer that any legitimategovernment has to be based on rule of law and a recognition that all people are equal underthe law.  And discrimination against the Rohingya or any other religious minority I think doesnot express the kind of country that Burma over the long term wants to be.  And I know of nosuccessful democracy in which sectarian or religious divisions are allowed to fester, or thepeople of different faiths are treated as second-class citizens.  Ultimately, that is destabilizingto a democracy.
And finally, I expressed to the President the need to continue to make additional progress onbasic issues of freedom and personal security, that journalists can't be jailed simply becausethey were critical of the government; that arbitrary arrests or individuals being in somefashion abused by government with impunity rather than being respected and treated inaccordance with law, that that's a test of whether or not a society is moving towards agenuine democratic process.
  
And the President yesterday acknowledged that some progress has been made, and there wasmore to do.  And our position will be to continue to measure what's happening on the ground,to consult with a wide range of groups here in Burma.  We will strengthen our relationshipwhere we see progress.  Where we don’t see progress, then we will continue to express ourconcerns, and we will not be able to fully realize the kind of bilateral relationship that we wantto have with Burma, the Burmese government, until we’ve seen some of these reformscompleted.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi:  Well, you asked whether it's going to be fruitful for the NLD to winthe elections if the amendments to the constitution are not pushed through.  I think it’s tooearly to ask this question.  We’ve just spent one afternoon debating the question ofconstitutional amendment.  I think perhaps some of you may have heard that proportionalrepresentation is not going to be instituted.
So when we started defending [inaudible] system against proportional representation, therewere many who said to us, you are a very small minority in the legislature; how can you hopeto win this case?  It’s not a matter of wanting to win a case, it’s a matter of standing up forwhat you believe in, for what you believe is necessary for the future of our country.
Now we are asking for a constitutional amendment not because we’re trying to win a case, butbecause we think that certain amendments are necessary if this country is to be a trulyfunctioning democracy in line with the will of the people.  Because of that, we will persist inour efforts to have the constitution amended in the right way and within the framework of thelaw.  I’ve always put great emphasis on this because I want peace and tranquility in ourcountry.  I want our people to learn to live under the rule of law, and to support and upholdthe importance of the rule of law. 
So with regard to the constitution, we know that the people support our wish to amend it incertain ways, and we are prepared to negotiate with those who do not wish to amend theconstitution.  I think that’s what democracy is all about.  We need a culture of negotiatedcompromise as the foundation for our democratic union.
So we would like to -- it’s not just a matter of debating the case in parliament and winningBrownie points or Boy Scout points, or whatever they’re called.  But it’s just a case of standingup for what we think our country needs.  And we would like to talk to those who disagree withus.  That, again, is what democracy is about.  You talk to those who disagree with you; youdon’t beat them down.  You exchange views.  And you come to a compromise, a settlementthat would be best for the country.
I’ve always said that dialogues and debates are not aimed at achieving victory for oneparticular party or the other, but victory for our people as a whole.  Whatever we decide onshould be seen as a victory for our nation, for the kind of democratic union that we have beentrying to build up for decades.
  
So please don’t worry about whether or not we will win the elections in 2015.  Of course, anyparty wants to win the elections.  I’m sure the President will tell you that.  But winning is noteverything -- it’s how you win.  I’d rather lose than win in the wrong way.  And that is the wayI want our party and our people to approach the problems that we have to tackle -- that wewant to win in the right way.  We want to bring the changes of the constitution about in theright way. 
We want to build up a strong foundation for national reconciliation, which means reconciliationnot just between the different ethnic groups and between different religious groups, butbetween different ideas -- for example, between the idea of military supremacy and the ideaof civilian authority over the military, which is the foundation of democracy.
So we want to exchange views and to come to an understanding with all those who at thismoment do not yet agree with us.  And we are confident that we can come to such asettlement, come to such an agreement because, after all, I do believe that what all of uswant is what is best for the country as a whole -- not just for particular individuals or groupsor organizations. 
So while I tell you that you need not worry about what affects amendment or non-amendmentto the constitution might have on the elections, I might as well ask you to vote for us whenwe do get there.
Barack Obama:  Pete Maer.
Q:  Mr. President, it seems the stage is set for even more confrontations between you andRepublicans when you get home, if that’s possible.  We’re told that you’re soon going to signthe immigration reform executive order.  To what extent are you concerned about aRepublican backlash from an action of that magnitude?
And on two other issues, I’m wondering what your take is on the plan to pass a bill to buildthe Keystone pipeline that’s in the works now, before the State Department’s review processis over.  And Senator McConnell is angry over the climate deal that you had made with China. How does all of this square with your post-election assessment that people want to, as youput it, get stuff done?
And if I may also pose a question to you, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.  Thank you for hosting all ofus here from the White House media corps.  As the President mentioned of the constitutionalbarring of you running in your country’s election, what do you think the impact will be fromthe President’s statement that was made here today on his strong opposition to thatconstitutional wording?  And what impact do you think it will have on the government here? And is there anything more that you’d like to see him do?  Thank you.
  
Barack Obama:  Pete, the day after the election I said that there are going to be areas ofagreement between me and Republicans, and there are going to be areas of disagreement. There are going to be actions I take they don’t like, and there are going to be bills they passthat I don’t like.
And I think, moving forward, that’s exactly what’s going to happen.  You’ve mentioned areaswhere we disagree.  I believe that America is a nation of immigrants.  Everybody agrees thatthe system is broken.  There has been ample opportunity for Congress to pass a bipartisanimmigration bill that would strengthen our borders, improve the legal immigration system, liftmillions of people out of the shadows so they are paying taxes and getting right by the law.  Itpassed out of the Senate.  I gave the House over a year to go ahead and at least give a voteto the Senate bilaterally; they failed to do so.  And I indicated to Speaker Boehner severalmonths ago that if, in fact, Congress failed to act, I would use all the lawful authority that Ipossess to try to make the system work better.  And that’s going to happen.  That’s going tohappen before the end of the year.
But what I’ve also said to them -- and I said this during the lunch with the Speaker andLeader McConnell -- is that I am always interested in negotiating a legislative solution to theimmigration problem, and that the minute they pass a bill that I can sign that fixes ourimmigration system, then any executive actions I take are replaced.
So they have the ability to fix the system.  What they don’t have the ability to do is to expectme to stand by with a broken system in perpetuity.  And I would advise that if, in fact, theywant to take a different approach, rather than devote a lot of time trying to constrain mylawful actions as the Chief Executive of the U.S. government in charge of our enforcing ourimmigration laws, that they spend some time passing a bill and engaging with all thestakeholders, the immigrant rights groups, the law enforcement groups, the evangelicals, thebusiness community, all of whom have said this is something that needs to be done, is wayoverdue.  And we’ve been talking about it for 10 years now, and it’s been consistently stalled.
So with respect to Keystone, I’ve been clear in the past, Pete, my position hasn’t changed,that this is a process that is supposed to be followed.  Right now you have a case pending inNebraska, where the pipeline would run through, in which a state court judge has questionedthe plan.  And until we know what the route is, it’s very hard to finish that evaluation.  And Idon’t think we should short-circuit that process.
I have also noted that, as policy matter, my government believes that we should judge thispipeline based on whether or not it accelerates climate change or whether it helps theAmerican people with their energy costs and their gas prices.  And I have to constantly pushback against this idea that somehow the Keystone pipeline is either this massive jobs bill forthe United States, or is somehow lowering gas prices.
  
Understand what this project is.  It is providing the ability of Canada to pump their oil, send itthrough our land, down to the Gulf, where it will be sold everywhere else.  That doesn't havean impact on U.S. gas prices.  You know what does have an impact on U.S. gas prices is theincredible boom in U.S. oil production and natural gas production that's taken place under myadministration. 
And if my Republican friends really want to focus on what's good for the American people interms of job creation and lower energy costs, we should be engaging in a conversation aboutwhat are we doing to produce even more homegrown energy.  I'm happy to have thatconversation.
With respect to the climate change deal, I have been very clear that I have responsibilities asPresident not just to current generations, but to future generations.  The science isindisputable.  The planet is getting warm, and it is getting warmer in part because of man-
made activity. 
And the release of carbon gases -- carbon dioxide and greenhouse gases into the atmospherecan have a potentially devastating effect that will cost our country, could devastatecommunities, could increase the impact of natural disasters, and will have an impactworldwide that is destabilizing and could affect our national security.  That's not my opinion,by the way, that is the opinion of our Joint Chiefs of Staff, that climate change is a directnational security threat.
Now the argument that I've received in the past has been either denial of the science or,alternatively, there's no point in us doing something about it despite us being one of the twolargest emitters in the world, because if we do something and China doesn't do anything, we'lljust put ourselves at a competitive disadvantage, we'll lose jobs to China, and the problemwon't be solved anyway.
I'm not going deny the science, but I took seriously the notion that we want all countries toparticipate in solving a global problem.  And so I engaged with China over a lengthy set ofnegotiations.  And by all independent accounts, for the first time, we got China to make a veryserious commitment to constrain its greenhouse gases.  Why would anybody be against that? That sounds like the right thing to do to me.  So that's a response to those specific ideas. 
But let me reiterate what I said at the top.  The fact that I disagree or Republicans disagreewith me on a certain set of issues doesn't exclude us working together on a whole range ofissues where we do agree.  They're interested in tax reform -- so am I.  Let's get to work. They're interested in promoting trade that will create jobs and opportunity for U.S. workersand U.S. businesses -- all over it.  It's part of what this Asia trip has been all about. They'reinterested in rebuilding our roads, our bridges, our ports, our airports, putting people back towork, making sure we're competitive -- I'm game.  So the one thing that I think is going to beimportant for us to have a successful partnership over the next couple of years is not makingdisagreements on a single issue suddenly a deal-breaker on every issue.
  
Democracy can never work that way because there are always going to be some differences. And when there are differences you can't elevate those differences above the commonalities.
I'm sorry that was a long answer, but it was a lot of questions.
Do you want to --
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi: I'm sorry the President can't get away from all those.
Barack Obama:  I know.  But before Daw Suu responds to the point about the constitutionalamendment, I just want to emphasize, ultimately it's up to the people of Burma to make adecision about all these provisions.
I expressed an objective view that some of current provisions don't seem to have muchgrounding in common sense or precedent when you look at other constitutions around theworld, and seem more focused on advantaging or disadvantaging certain players.  And one ofthe basic concepts of a constitution is that it creates a level playing field for all people, andthen so I use that as an example not because I think my voice is the one that's most relevantin terms of the constitutional amendment process, but ultimately it's up to the people ofBurma.
Q:  [Off-mic.]
Barack Obama:  I did?  It doesn't make much sense to me.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi:  I believe democracy should stand up for that principle. 
Barack Obama:  Absolutely.
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi:  Well, I've always said that it's somewhat flattering to have aconstitution written with me in mind.  But it shouldn't be done that way.  That's not how ademocratic constitution should be written.  And we object to that clause not because -- notbecause it debars me from the presidency as such, but because it is against the principle ofdemocracy and also unconstitutional.  The constitution says that all citizens should be treatedas equals, and this is discrimination on the grounds of my children, my children's spouses, etcetera, et cetera. 
Now, this is not acceptable.  And our people are firmly behind us in our desire to change thisclause.  And if President Obama said anything about the necessity to change a clause likethat, they will love him very much for it.  So he will be very popular among our people.
  
And as he said, in the end, it is up to our people to shape the destiny of our country, includingthe way the constitution is going to be rewritten.  And I think the majority of our peopleunderstand that this constitution cannot stand as it is if we want to make the full transition todemocracy; 59(f), as you know, debars anybody who is children of -- the spouses of thechildren belong to -- are citizens of another country.
And according to the law -- and I think the President will know the law better than I dobecause I'm not a lawyer -- according to the law, anybody who is over the age of 18, orwhatever legal adult age may be in his or her country, is responsible for himself or herself. Nobody else is responsible for that person. 
So from that point of view also, you cannot penalize anybody for what his or her adult childrendo.  From that point of view, it's illegal, it's against all norms of justice.  And from the point ofview of democracy, it is not right to discriminate against one particular citizen.  You wouldn'tlike to be discriminated against, would you?
So I think our people support the idea of amending this clause because -- not particularlybecause they want me to be president, perhaps because they do.  But I don't think it is somuch because of that, but because they realize that this is unfair, unjust and undemocratic.
Q:  Thank you.  I am [inaudible] from 11 Media from Myanmar. And I wanted to ask thequestion to Mr. President.  The question is, have you discussed about the [inaudible] situationin Myanmar [inaudible] president Thein Sein last night?  Because more journalists thanpoliticians have been arrested, particularly in [inaudible], under the present Thein Seinadministration. And when you discuss about this, how did he respond to this discussion? Thank you.
Barack Obama:  I didn't bring up specific cases with him.  I brought up a basic principle thatI stated earlier, which is that a free press is a foundation for any democracy. 
We rely on journalists to explain and describe the actions of our government.  If thegovernment controls the journalists, then it's very difficult for citizens to hold that governmentaccountable.  It's a fairly straightforward proposition.  And I recognize that there is atransition process that's taking place, that there is a more robust debate today than there wasthe last time I visited.  But to go back to what we said earlier, we can't be complacent.  Andwe, as a government, are going to be troubled when we hear reports of journalists beingimprisoned, being killed, being intimidated, or being censored.
And when we engage with this government -- or any government -- and we have evidencethat that's taking place, then we're going to raise it. 
Thank you very much.
