I also want to acknowledge all of our soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines serving in Iraq and Afghanistan.That includes the Camp Lejeune Marines now serving with -- or soon joining -- the Second MarineExpeditionary Force in Iraq; those with Special Purpose Marine Air Ground Task Force in Afghanistan; andthose among the 8,000 Marines who are preparing to deploy to Afghanistan. We have you in our prayers.We pay tribute to your service. We thank you and your families for all that you do for America. And I want allof you to know that there is no higher honor or greater responsibility than serving as your Commander-in-
Chief.
I also want to take this opportunity to acknowledge Ryan Crocker, who recently completed his service as ourAmbassador to Iraq. Throughout his career, Ryan always took on the toughest assignments. He is anexample of the very best that this nation has to offer, and we owe him a great debt of gratitude. He carriedon his work with an extraordinary degree of cooperation with two of our finest Generals -- General DavidPetraeus, and General Ray Odierno -- who will be critical in carrying forward the strategy that I will outlinetoday.
Next month will mark the sixth anniversary of the war in Iraq. By any measure, this has already been a longwar. For the men and women of America’s armed forces -- and for your families -- this war has been one ofthe most extraordinary chapters of service in the history of our nation. You have endured tour after tour aftertour of duty. You have known the dangers of combat and the lonely distance of loved ones. You have foughtagainst tyranny and disorder.

You have bled for your best friends and for unknown Iraqis. And you have borne an enormous burden foryour fellow citizens, while extending a precious opportunity to the people of Iraq. Under toughcircumstances, the men and women of the United States military have served with honor, and succeededbeyond any expectation.  
Today, I have come to speak to you about how the war in Iraq will end.
To understand where we need to go in Iraq, it is important for the American people to understand where wenow stand. Thanks in great measure to your service, the situation in Iraq has improved. Violence has beenreduced substantially from the horrific sectarian killing of 2006 and 2007. Al Qaeda in Iraq has been dealt aserious blow by our troops and Iraq’s Security Forces, and through our partnership with Sunni Arabs. Thecapacity of Iraq’s Security Forces has improved, and Iraq’s leaders have taken steps toward politicalaccommodation. The relative peace and strong participation in January’s provincial elections sent apowerful message to the world about how far Iraqis have come in pursuing their aspirations through apeaceful political process. 
But let there be no doubt: Iraq is not yet secure, and there will be difficult days ahead. Violence will continueto be a part of life in Iraq. Too many fundamental political questions about Iraq’s future remain unresolved.Too many Iraqis are still displaced or destitute. Declining oil revenues will put an added strain on agovernment that has had difficulty delivering basic services. Not all of Iraq’s neighbors are contributing to itssecurity. Some are working at times to undermine it. And even as Iraq’s government is on a surer footing, itis not yet a full partner -- politically and economically -- in the region, or with the international community
In short, today there is a renewed cause for hope in Iraq, but that hope rests upon an emerging foundation.
On my first full day in office, I directed my national security team to undertake a comprehensive review ofour strategy in Iraq to determine the best way to strengthen that foundation, while strengthening Americannational security. I have listened to my Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and commanders onthe ground. We have acted with careful consideration of events on the ground; with respect for the securityagreements between the United States and Iraq; and with a critical recognition that the long-term solution inIraq must be political -- not military. Because the most important decisions that have to be made about Iraq’sfuture must now be made by Iraqis.
We have also taken into account the simple reality that America can no longer afford to see Iraq in isolationfrom other priorities: we face the challenge of refocusing on Afghanistan and Pakistan; of relieving theburden on our military; and of rebuilding our struggling economy -- and these are challenges that we willmeet.
Today, I can announce that our review is complete, and that the United States will pursue a new strategy toend the war in Iraq through a transition to full Iraqi responsibility.
This strategy is grounded in a clear and achievable goal shared by the Iraqi people and the Americanpeople: an Iraq that is sovereign, stable, and self-reliant.

To achieve that goal, we will work to promote an Iraqi government that is just, representative, andaccountable, and that provides neither support nor safe-haven to terrorists. We will help Iraq build new tiesof trade and commerce with the world. And we will forge a partnership with the people and government ofIraq that contributes to the peace and security of the region.
What we will not do is let the pursuit of the perfect stand in the way of achievable goals. We cannot rid Iraqof all who oppose America or sympathize with our adversaries. We cannot police Iraq’s streets until they arecompletely safe, nor stay until Iraq’s union is perfected. We cannot sustain indefinitely a commitment thathas put a strain on our military, and will cost the American people nearly a trillion dollars. America’s menand women in uniform have fought block by block, province by province, year after year, to give the Iraqisthis chance to choose a better future. Now, we must ask the Iraqi people to seize it.  
The first part of this strategy is therefore the responsible removal of our combat brigades from Iraq.
As a candidate for President, I made clear my support for a timeline of 16 months to carry out thisdrawdown, while pledging to consult closely with our military commanders upon taking office to ensure thatwe preserve the gains we’ve made and protect our troops. Those consultations are now complete, and Ihave chosen a timeline that will remove our combat brigades over the next 18 months.
Let me say this as plainly as I can: by August 31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will end.
As we carry out this drawdown, my highest priority will be the safety and security of our troops and civiliansin Iraq. We will proceed carefully, and I will consult closely with my military commanders on the ground andwith the Iraqi government. There will surely be difficult periods and tactical adjustments. But our enemiesshould be left with no doubt: this plan gives our military the forces and the flexibility they need to support ourIraqi partners, and to succeed.
After we remove our combat brigades, our mission will change from combat to supporting the Iraqigovernment and its Security Forces as they take the absolute lead in securing their country. As I have longsaid, we will retain a transitional force to carry out three distinct functions: training, equipping, and advisingIraqi Security Forces as long as they remain non-sectarian; conducting targeted counter-terrorism missions;and protecting our ongoing civilian and military efforts within Iraq. Initially, this force will likely be made up of35-50,000 U.S. troops.
Through this period of transition, we will carry out further redeployments. And under the Status of ForcesAgreement with the Iraqi government, I intend to remove all U.S. troops from Iraq by the end of 2011. Wewill complete this transition to Iraqi responsibility, and we will bring our troops home with the honor that theyhave earned.
As we responsibly remove our combat brigades, we will pursue the second part of our strategy: sustaineddiplomacy on behalf of a more peaceful and prosperous Iraq.

The drawdown of our military should send a clear signal that Iraq’s future is now its own responsibility. Thelong-term success of the Iraqi nation will depend upon decisions made by Iraq’s leaders and the fortitude ofthe Iraqi people. Iraq is a sovereign country with legitimate institutions; America cannot -- and should not --take their place. However, a strong political, diplomatic, and civilian effort on our part can advance progressand help lay a foundation for lasting peace and security.
This effort will be led by our new Ambassador to Iraq -- Chris Hill. From his time in the Peace Corps, to hiswork in Kosovo and Korea, Ambassador Hill has been tested, and he has shown the pragmatism and skillthat we need right now. He will be supported by the courageous and capable work of so many Americandiplomats and aid workers who are serving in Iraq.
Going forward, we can make a difference on several fronts. We will work with the United Nations to supportnational elections, while helping Iraqis improve local government. We can serve as an honest broker inpursuit of fair and durable agreements on issues that have divided Iraq’s leaders. And just as we will supportIraq’s Security Forces, we will help Iraqi institutions strengthen their capacity to protect the rule of law,confront corruption, and deliver basic services.
Diplomacy and assistance is also required to help the millions of displaced Iraqis. These men, women andchildren are a living consequence of this war and a challenge to stability in the region, and they mustbecome a part of Iraq’s reconciliation and recovery. America has a strategic interest -- and a moralresponsibility -- to act. In the coming months, my administration will provide more assistance and take stepsto increase international support for countries already hosting refugees; we’ll cooperate with others toresettle Iraqis facing great personal risk; and we will work with the Iraqi government over time to resettlerefugees and displaced Iraqis within Iraq -- because there are few more powerful indicators of lasting peacethan displaced citizens returning home.
Now, before I go any further, I want to take a moment to speak directly to the people of Iraq.
You are a great nation, rooted in the cradle of civilization. You are joined together by enduringaccomplishments, and a history that connects you as surely as the two rivers carved into your land. In yearspast, you have persevered through tyranny and terror; through personal insecurity and sectarian violence.And instead of giving in to the forces of disunion, you stepped back from a descent into civil war, andshowed a proud resilience that deserves respect.
Our nations have known difficult times together. But ours is a bond forged by shared bloodshed, andcountless friendships among our people. We Americans have offered our most precious resource -- ouryoung men and women -- to work with you to rebuild what was destroyed by despotism; to root out ourcommon enemies; and to seek peace and prosperity for our children and grandchildren, and for yours.
There are those who will try to prevent that future for Iraq -- who will insist that Iraq’s differences cannot bereconciled without more killing. They represent the forces that destroy nations and lead only to despair, andthey will test our will in the months and years to come. America, too, has known these forces. We enduredthe pain of Civil War, and bitter divisions of region and race. But hostility and hatred are no match for justice;they offer no pathway to peace; and they must not stand between the people of Iraq and a future ofreconciliation and hope.

So to the Iraqi people, let me be clear about America’s intentions. The United States pursues no claim onyour territory or your resources. We respect your sovereignty and the tremendous sacrifices you have madefor your country. We seek a full transition to Iraqi responsibility for the security of your country. And goingforward, we can build a lasting relationship founded upon mutual interests and mutual respect as Iraq takesits rightful place in the community of nations.
That leads me to the third part of our strategy -- comprehensive American engagement across the region.
The future of Iraq is inseparable from the future of the broader Middle East, so we must work with ourfriends and partners to establish a new framework that advances Iraq’s security and the region’s. It is timefor Iraq to be a full partner in a regional dialogue, and for Iraq’s neighbors to establish productive andnormalized relations with Iraq. And going forward, the United States will pursue principled and sustainedengagement with all of the nations in the region, and that will include Iran and Syria.
This reflects a fundamental truth: we can no longer deal with regional challenges in isolation -- we need asmarter, more sustainable and comprehensive approach. That is why we are renewing our diplomacy, whilerelieving the burden on our military. That is why we are refocusing on al Qaeda in Afghanistan and Pakistan;developing a strategy to use all elements of American power to prevent Iran from developing a nuclearweapon; and actively seeking a lasting peace between Israel and the Arab world.  And that is why we havenamed three of America’s most accomplished diplomats -- George Mitchell, Dennis Ross and RichardHolbrooke -- to support Secretary Clinton and me as we carry forward this agenda. 
Every nation and every group must know -- whether you wish America good or ill -- that the end of the war inIraq will enable a new era of American leadership and engagement in the Middle East. And that era has justbegun.
Finally, I want to be very clear that my strategy for ending the war in Iraq does not end with military plans ordiplomatic agendas -- it endures through our commitment to uphold our sacred trust with every man andwoman who has served in Iraq.
You make up a fraction of the American population, but in an age when so many people and institutionshave acted irresponsibly, you did the opposite -- you volunteered to bear the heaviest burden. And for youand for your families, the war does not end when you come home. It lives on in memories of your fellowsoldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines who gave their lives. It endures in the wound that is slow to heal, thedisability that isn’t going away, the dream that wakes you at night, or the stiffening in your spine when a carbackfires down the street. 
You and your families have done your duty -- now a grateful nation must do ours. That is why I amincreasing the number of soldiers and Marines, so that we lessen the burden on those who are serving. Andthat is why I have committed to expanding our system of veterans health care to serve more patients, and toprovide better care in more places. We will continue building new wounded warrior facilities across America,and invest in new ways of identifying and treating the signature wounds of this war: Post-Traumatic StressDisorder and Traumatic Brain Injury, as well as other combat injuries.

We also know that service does not end with the person wearing the uniform. In her visits with militaryfamilies across the country, my wife Michelle has learned firsthand about the unique burden that yourfamilies endure every day. I want you to know this: military families are a top priority for Michelle and me,and they will be a top priority for my administration. We’ll raise military pay, and continue providing qualitychild-care, job-training for spouses, and expanded counseling and outreach to families that have known theseparation and stress of war. We will also heed the lesson of history -- that those who fight in battle canform the backbone of our middle class -- by implementing a 21st century GI Bill to help our veterans livetheir dreams.
As a nation, we have had our share of debates about the war in Iraq. It has, at times, divided us as apeople. To this very day, there are some Americans who want to stay in Iraq longer, and some who want toleave faster. But there should be no disagreement on what the men and women of our military haveachieved.
And so I want to be very clear: We sent our troops to Iraq to do away with Saddam Hussein’s regime -- andyou got the job done. We kept our troops in Iraq to help establish a sovereign government -- and you got thejob done. And we will leave the Iraqi people with a hard-earned opportunity to live a better life -- that is yourachievement; that is the prospect that you have made possible.
There are many lessons to be learned from what we’ve experienced. We have learned that America mustgo to war with clearly defined goals, which is why I’ve ordered a review of our policy in Afghanistan. Wehave learned that we must always weigh the costs of action, and communicate those costs candidly to theAmerican people, which is why I’ve put Iraq and Afghanistan into my budget. We have learned that in the21st century, we must use all elements of American power to achieve our objectives, which is why I amcommitted to building our civilian national security capacity so that the burden is not continually pushed onto our military. We have learned that our political leaders must pursue the broad and bipartisan support thatour national security policies depend upon, which is why I will consult with Congress and in carrying out myplans. And we have learned the importance of working closely with friends and allies, which is why we arelaunching a new era of engagement in the world.
The starting point for our policies must always be the safety of the American people. I know that you -- themen and women of the finest fighting force in the history of the world -- can meet any challenge, and defeatany foe. And as long as I am your Commander-in-Chief, I promise you that I will only send you into harm’sway when it is absolutely necessary, and provide you with the equipment and support you need to get thejob done. That is the most important lesson of all -- for the consequences of war are dire, the sacrificesimmeasurable.  
You know because you have seen those sacrifices. You have lived them. And we all honor them.
"Semper Fidelis" -- it means always being faithful to Corps, and to country, and to the memory of fallencomrades like Corporal Jonathan Yale and Lance Corporal Jordan Haerter. These young men enlisted in atime of war, knowing they would face great danger. They came here, to Camp Lejeune, as they trained fortheir mission. And last April, they were standing guard in Anbar. In an age when suicide is a weapon, theywere suddenly faced with an oncoming truck filled with explosives. These two Marines stood their ground.

These two Marines opened fire. And these two Marines stopped that truck. When the thousands of poundsof explosives detonated, they had saved fifty Marines and Iraqi police who would have been in the truck’spath, but Corporal Yale and Lance Corporal Haerter lost their own lives. Jonathan was 21. Jordan was 19.
In the town where Jordan Haerter was from, a bridge was dedicated in his name. One Marine who traveledto the ceremony said: "We flew here from all over the country to pay tribute to our friend Jordan, who riskedhis life to save us. We wouldn’t be here without him."
America’s time in Iraq is filled with stories of men and women like this. Their names are written into bridgesand town squares. They are etched into stones at Arlington, and in quiet places of rest across our land.They are spoken in schools and on city blocks. They live on in the memories of those who wear youruniform, in the hearts of those they loved, and in the freedom of the nation they served.
Each American who has served in Iraq has their own story. Each of you has your own story. And that storyis now a part of the history of the United States of America -- a nation that exists only because free men andwomen have bled for it from the beaches of Normandy to the deserts of Anbar; from the mountains of Koreato the streets of Kandahar. You teach us that the price of freedom is great. Your sacrifice should challengeall of us -- every single American -- to ask what we can do to be better citizens.
There will be more danger in the months ahead. We will face new tests and unforeseen trials. But thanks tothe sacrifices of those who have served, we have forged hard-earned progress, we are leaving Iraq to itspeople, and we have begun the work of ending this war. 
Thank you, God Bless you, and God Bless the United States of America. Semper Fi.