Today, after two years of negotiations, the United States, together with our internationalpartners, has achieved something that decades of animosity has not -- a comprehensive,long-term deal with Iran that will prevent it from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
This deal demonstrates that American diplomacy can bring about real and meaningful change-- change that makes our country, and the world, safer and more secure. This deal is also inline with a tradition of American leadership. It’s now more than 50 years since PresidentKennedy stood before the American people and said, “Let us never negotiate out of fear, butlet us never fear to negotiate.”1 He was speaking then about the need for discussions betweenthe United States and the Soviet Union, which led to efforts to restrict the spread of nuclearweapons.
In those days, the risk was a catastrophic nuclear war between two super powers. In ourtime, the risk is that nuclear weapons will spread to more and more countries, particularly inthe Middle East, the most volatile region in our world.
Today, because America negotiated from a position of strength and principle, we have stoppedthe spread of nuclear weapons in this region. Because of this deal, the internationalcommunity will be able to verify that the Islamic Republic of Iran will not develop a nuclearweapon.
  
This deal meets every single one of the bottom lines that we established when we achieved aframework earlier this spring. Every pathway to a nuclear weapon is cut off. And theinspection and transparency regime necessary to verify that objective will be put in place.Because of this deal, Iran will not produce the highly enriched uranium and weapons-gradeplutonium that form the raw materials necessary for a nuclear bomb.
Because of this deal, Iran will remove two-thirds of its installed centrifuges -- the machinesnecessary to produce highly enriched uranium for a bomb -- and store them under constantinternational supervision. Iran will not use its advanced centrifuges to produce enricheduranium for the next decade. Iran will also get rid of 98 percent of its stockpile of enricheduranium.
To put that in perspective, Iran currently has a stockpile that could produce up to 10 nuclearweapons. Because of this deal, that stockpile will be reduced to a fraction of what would berequired for a single weapon. This stockpile limitation will last for 15 years.
Because of this deal, Iran will modify the core of its reactor in Arak so that it will not produceweapons-grade plutonium. And it has agreed to ship the spent fuel from the reactor out of thecountry for the lifetime of the reactor. For at least the next 15 years, Iran will not build anynew heavy-water reactors.
Because of this deal, we will, for the first time, be in a position to verify all of thesecommitments. That means this deal is not built on trust; it is built on verification. Inspectorswill have 24/7 access to Iran’s key nuclear facilities.
Iran [Inspectors]2 will have access to Iran’s entire nuclear supply chain -- its uranium minesand mills, its conversion facility, and its centrifuge manufacturing and storage facilities. Thisensures that Iran will not be able to divert materials from known facilities to covert ones.Some of these transparency measures will be in place for 25 years.
Because of this deal, inspectors will also be able to access any suspicious location. Put simply,the organization responsible for the inspections, the IAEA, will have access where necessary,when necessary. That arrangement is permanent. And the IAEA has also reached anagreement with Iran to get access that it needs to complete its investigation into the possiblemilitary dimensions of Iran’s past nuclear research.
Finally, Iran is permanently prohibited from pursuing a nuclear weapon under the NuclearNon-Proliferation Treaty, which provided the basis for the international community’s efforts toapply pressure on Iran.
As Iran takes steps to implement this deal, it will receive relief from the sanctions that we putin place because of Iran’s nuclear program -- both America’s own sanctions and sanctionsimposed by the United Nations Security Council. This relief will be phased in.
  
Iran must complete key nuclear steps before it begins to receive new sanctions relief. Andover the course of the next decade, Iran must abide by the deal before additional sanctionsare lifted, including five years for restrictions related to arms, and eight years for restrictionsrelated to ballistic missiles.
All of this will be memorialized and endorsed in a new United Nations Security Councilresolution. And if Iran violates the deal, all of these sanctions will snap back into place. Sothere’s a very clear incentive for Iran to follow through, and there are very real consequencesfor a violation.
That’s the deal. It has the full backing of the international community. Congress will now havean opportunity to review the details, and my administration stands ready to provide extensivebriefings on how this will move forward.
As the American people and Congress review the deal, it will be important to consider thealternative. Consider what happens in a world without this deal. Without this deal, there is noscenario where the world joins us in sanctioning Iran until it completely dismantles its nuclearprogram. Nothing we know about the Iranian government suggests that it would simplycapitulate under that kind of pressure. And the world would not support an effort topermanently sanction Iran into submission. We put sanctions in place to get a diplomaticresolution, and that is what we have done.
Without this deal, there would be no agreed-upon limitations for the Iranian nuclear program.Iran could produce, operate and test more and more centrifuges. Iran could fuel a reactorcapable of producing plutonium for a bomb. And we would not have any of the inspectionsthat allow us to detect a covert nuclear weapons program. In other words, no deal means nolasting constraints on Iran’s nuclear program.
Such a scenario would make it more likely that other countries in the region would feelcompelled to pursue their own nuclear programs, threatening a nuclear arms race in the mostvolatile region of the world. It would also present the United States with fewer and lesseffective options to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
I’ve been President and Commander-in-Chief for over six years now. Time and again, I havefaced decisions about whether or not to use military force. It’s the gravest decision that anyPresident has to make. Many times, in multiple countries, I have decided to use force. And Iwill never hesitate to do so when it is in our national security interest. I strongly believe thatour national security interest now depends upon preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclearweapon -- which means that without a diplomatic resolution, either I or a future U.S.President would face a decision about whether or not to allow Iran to obtain a nuclear weaponor whether to use our military to stop it.
  
Put simply, no deal means a greater chance of more war in the Middle East. Moreover, wegive nothing up by testing whether or not this problem can be solved peacefully. If, in aworst-case scenario, Iran violates the deal, the same options that are available to me todaywill be available to any U.S. President in the future. And I have no doubt that 10 or 15 yearsfrom now, the person who holds this office will be in a far stronger position with Iran furtheraway from a weapon and with the inspections and transparency that allow us to monitor theIranian program.
For this reason, I believe it would be irresponsible to walk away from this deal. But on such atough issue, it is important that the American people and their representatives in Congressget a full opportunity to review the deal. After all, the details matter. And we’ve had some ofthe finest nuclear scientists in the world working through those details. And we’re dealing witha country -- Iran -- that has been a sworn adversary of the United States for over 35 years.So I welcome a robust debate in Congress on this issue, and I welcome scrutiny of the detailsof this agreement.
But I will remind Congress that you don’t make deals like this with your friends. Wenegotiated arms control agreements with the Soviet Union when that nation was committed toour destruction. And those agreements ultimately made us safer.
I am confident that this deal will meet the national security interest of the United States andour allies. So I will veto any legislation that prevents the successful implementation of thisdeal.
We do not have to accept an inevitable spiral into conflict. And we certainly shouldn’t seek it.And precisely because the stakes are so high, this is not the time for politics or posturing.Tough talk from Washington does not solve problems. Hard-nosed diplomacy, leadership thathas united the world’s major powers offers a more effective way to verify that Iran is notpursuing a nuclear weapon.
Now, that doesn’t mean that this deal will resolve all of our differences with Iran. We sharethe concerns expressed by many of our friends in the Middle East, including Israel and theGulf States, about Iran’s support for terrorism and its use of proxies to destabilize the region.But that is precisely why we are taking this step -- because an Iran armed with a nuclearweapon would be far more destabilizing and far more dangerous to our friends and to theworld.
Meanwhile, we will maintain our own sanctions related to Iran’s support for terrorism, itsballistic missile program, and its human rights violations. We will continue our unprecedentedefforts to strengthen Israel’s security -- efforts that go beyond what any Americanadministration has done before. And we will continue the work we began at Camp David toelevate our partnership with the Gulf States to strengthen their capabilities to counter threatsfrom Iran or terrorist groups like ISIL.
  
However, I believe that we must continue to test whether or not this region, which has knownso much suffering, so much bloodshed, can move in a different direction.
Time and again, I have made clear to the Iranian people that we will always be open toengagement on the basis of mutual interests and mutual respect. Our differences are real andthe difficult history between our nations cannot be ignored. But it is possible to change. Thepath of violence and rigid ideology, a foreign policy based on threats to attack your neighborsor eradicate Israel -- that’s a dead end. A different path, one of tolerance and peacefulresolution of conflict, leads to more integration into the global economy, more engagementwith the international community, and the ability of the Iranian people to prosper and thrive.
This deal offers an opportunity to move in a new direction. We should seize it.
We have come a long way to reach this point -- decades of an Iranian nuclear program, manyyears of sanctions, and many months of intense negotiation. Today, I want to thank themembers of Congress from both parties who helped us put in place the sanctions that haveproven so effective, as well as the other countries who joined us in that effort.
I want to thank our negotiating partners -- the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Russia,China, as well as the European Union -- for our unity in this effort, which showed that theworld can do remarkable things when we share a vision of peacefully addressing conflicts. Weshowed what we can do when we do not split apart.
And finally, I want to thank the American negotiating team. We had a team of experts workingfor several weeks straight on this, including our Secretary of Energy, Ernie Moniz. And I wantto particularly thank John Kerry, our Secretary of State, who began his service to this countrymore than four decades ago when he put on our uniform and went off to war. He’s nowmaking this country safer through his commitment to strong, principled American diplomacy.
History shows that America must lead not just with our might, but with our principles. Itshows we are stronger not when we are alone, but when we bring the world together. Today’sannouncement marks one more chapter in this pursuit of a safer and more helpful and morehopeful world.
Thank you. God bless you. And God bless the United States of America.
1
The lesser known of the two antimetaboles in John F. Kennedy's Presidential Inaugural Address; also used in Kennedy's First Address to theUnited Nations General Assembly. In referring to the Iran nuclear negotiations, President Obama has used the figured phrase at least two timesin his presidential speeches -- Edward Kennedy Institute Dedication Address on 30 March 2015, and the Iran Nuclear Agreement FrameworkAddress on 2 April 2015. Senator Obama used the figured phrase in reference to the Iraq War in a 2006 address at the Wilson InternationalCenter for Scholars. 
2 Unstated but issued as a correction to the official text transcription by WhiteHouse.gov
