Hello Legionnaires! It is wonderful to see all of you. Let me, first of all, thank CommanderFoster for your introduction and for your lifetime of service to your fellow Marines, soldiersand veterans. On behalf of us all, I want to thank Jimmie and I want to thank your entireleadership team for welcoming me here today. Thank you very much.
Your National Adjutant, Dan Wheeler; your Executive Director, your voice in Washington,Peter Gaytan, who does just an extraordinary job; and the President of the American LegionAuxiliary, Carlene Ashworth -- thank you for your extraordinary service. To Rehta Foster andall the spouses, daughters and sisters of the Auxiliary, and the Sons of the American Legion --as military families, you also serve, and we salute all of you as well.
There are some special guests here I want to acknowledge. They may have already beenacknowledged, but they're great friends so I want to make sure that I point them out. First ofall, the wonderful governor of Minnesota, Mark Dayton, is here. Two senators who are workingon behalf of veterans every single day -- Amy Klobuchar and Al Franken. Congressman KeithEllison -- this is his district. Minneapolis Mayor R.T. Rybak, a great friend. To all the othermembers of Congress and Minnesota elected officials who are here, welcome.
It is wonderful to be back with the American Legion. Back in Illinois, my home state -- Hey!Illinois is in the house. We worked together to make sure veterans across the state weregetting the benefits they had earned. When I was in the U.S. Senate, we worked together tospotlight the tragedy of homelessness among veterans -- and the need to end it.
  
As President, I’ve welcomed Jimmie and your leadership to the Oval Office to hear directlyfrom you. And I have been -- I've been honored to have you by my side when I signedadvance appropriations to protect veterans' health care from the budget battles inWashington, -- when I signed legislation to give new support to veterans and their caregivers,and, most recently, when I proposed new initiatives to make sure the private sector is hiringour talented veterans.
So, American Legion, I thank you for your partnership. I appreciate the opportunity to talkwith you today about what we need to do to make sure America is taking care of our veteransas well as you’ve taken care of us.
And I’m grateful to be with you for another reason. A lot of our fellow citizens are still reelingfrom Hurricane Irene and its aftermath. Folks are surveying the damage. Some are dealingwith tremendous flooding. As a government, we’re going to make sure that states andcommunities have the support they need so their folks can recover.
And across the nation, we’re still digging out from the worst economic crisis since the GreatDepression. It’s taking longer and it's been more difficult than any of us had imagined. Andeven though we’ve taken some steps in the right direction, we've got a lot more to do. Oureconomy has to grow faster. We have to create more jobs, and we have to do it faster. Andmost of all, we've got to break the gridlock in Washington that’s been preventing us fromtaking the action we need to get this country moving. That’s why, next week, I’ll be speakingto the nation about a plan to create jobs and reduce our deficit -- a plan that I want to seepassed by Congress. We've got to get this done.
And here’s what else I know. We Americans have been through tough times before, muchtougher than these. And we didn’t just get through them; we emerged stronger than before.Not by luck. Not by chance. But because, in hard times, Americans don’t quit. We don’t giveup. We summon that spirit that says, when we come together, when we choose to moveforward together, as one people, there’s nothing we can’t achieve.
And, Legionnaires, you know this story because it's the story of your lives. And in times likethese, all Americans can draw strength from your example. When Hitler controlled a continentand fascism appeared unstoppable, when our harbor was bombed and our Pacific fleetcrippled, there were those that declared that the United States had been reduced to a third-
class power. But you, our veterans of World War II, crossed the oceans and stormed thebeaches and freed the millions, liberated the camps and showed the United States of Americais the greatest force for freedom that the world has ever known.
When North Korea invaded the South, pushing the allied forces into a tiny sliver of territory --the Pusan Perimeter -- it seemed like the war could be lost. But you, our Korean Warveterans, pushed back, fought on, year after bloody year. And this past Veterans Day, I wentto Seoul and joined our Korean War veterans for the 60th anniversary of that war, and wemarked that milestone in a free and prosperous Republic of Korea, one of our greatest allies.
  
When communist forces in Vietnam unleashed the Tet Offensive, it fueled the debate here athome that raged over that war. You, our Vietnam veterans, did not always receive the respectthat you deserved -- which was a national shame. But let it be remembered that you wonevery major battle of that war. Every single one. As President, I’ve been honored to welcomeour Vietnam veterans to the White House and finally present them with the medals andrecognition that they had earned. It’s been a chance to convey, on behalf of the Americanpeople, those simple words with which our Vietnam veterans greet each other -- “Welcomehome.”
Legionnaires, in the decades that followed, the spirit of your service was carried forth by ourtroops in the sands of Desert Storm and the rugged hills of the Balkans. And now, it's carriedon by a new generation. Next weekend, we'll mark the 10th anniversary of those awfulattacks on our nation. In the days ahead, we will honor the lives we lost and the families thatloved them; the first responders who rushed to save others; and we will honor all those whohave served to keep us safe these 10 difficult years, especially the men and women of ourArmed Forces.
Today, as we near this solemn anniversary, it’s fitting that we salute the extraordinary decadeof service rendered by the 9/11 Generation -- the more than 5 million Americans who've wornthe uniform over the past 10 years. They were there, on duty, that September morning,having enlisted in a time of peace, but they instantly transitioned to a war footing. They’re themillions of recruits who have stepped forward since, seeing their nation at war and saying,“Send me.” They’re every single soldier, sailor, airman, Marine and Coast Guardsman servingtoday, who has volunteered to serve in a time of war, knowing that they could be sent intoharm’s way.
They come from every corner of our country, big cities, small towns. They come from everybackground and every creed. They’re sons and daughters who carry on the family’s traditionof service, and they're new immigrants who’ve become our newest citizens. They’re ourNational Guardsmen and Reservists who've served in unprecedented deployments. They’re therecord number of women in our military, proving themselves in combat like never before. Andevery day for the past 10 years, these men and women have succeeded together -- as oneAmerican team.
They're a generation of innovators, and they’ve changed the way America fights and wins atwars. Raised in the age of the Internet, they’ve harnessed new technologies on the battlefield.They’ve learned the cultures and traditions and languages of the places where they served.Trained to fight, they’ve also taken on the role of diplomats and mayors and developmentexperts, negotiating with tribal sheikhs, working with village shuras, partnering withcommunities. Young captains, sergeants, lieutenants -- they've assumed responsibilities oncereserved for more senior commanders, and reminding us that in an era when so many otherinstitutions have shirked their obligations, the men and women of the United States militarywelcome responsibility.
  
In a decade of war, they've borne an extraordinary burden, with more than 2 million of ourservice members deploying to the warzones. Hundreds of thousands have deployed again andagain, year after year. Never before has our nation asked so much of our all-volunteer force --that one percent of Americans who wears the uniform.
We see the scope of their sacrifice in the tens of thousands who now carry the scars of war,both seen and unseen -- our remarkable wounded warriors. We see it in our extraordinarymilitary families who serve here at home -- the military spouses who hold their familiestogether; the millions of military children, many of whom have lived most of their young liveswith our nation at war and mom or dad deployed.
Most profoundly, we see the wages of war in those patriots who never came home. They gavetheir all, their last full measure of devotion, in Kandahar, in the Korengal, in Helmand, in thebattles for Baghdad and Fallujah and Ramadi. Now they lay at rest in quiet corners ofAmerica, but they live on in the families who loved them and in a nation that is safer becauseof their service. And today we pay humble tribute to the more than 6,200 Americans inuniform who have given their lives in this hard decade of war. We honor them all. We aregrateful for them.
Through their service, through their sacrifice, through their astonishing record ofachievement, our forces have earned their place among the greatest of generations. Topplingthe Taliban in just weeks. Driving al Qaeda from the training camps where they plotted 9/11.Giving the Afghan people the opportunity to live free from terror. When the decision wasmade to go into Iraq, our troops raced across deserts and removed a dictator in less than amonth. When insurgents, militias and terrorists plunged Iraq into chaos, our troops adapted,they endured ferocious urban combat, they reduced the violence and gave Iraqis a chance toforge their own future.
When a resurgent Taliban threatened to give al Qaeda more space to plot against us, theadditional forces I ordered to Afghanistan went on the offensive -- taking the fight to theTaliban and pushing them out of their safe havens, allowing Afghans to reclaim theircommunities and training Afghan forces. And a few months ago, our troops achieved ourgreatest victory yet in the fight against those who attacked us on 9/11 -- delivering justice toOsama bin Laden in one of the greatest intelligence and military operations in Americanhistory.
Credit for these successes, credit for this progress, belongs to all who have worn the uniformin these wars. Today we're honored to be joined by some of them. And I would ask all thosewho served this past decade -- the members of the 9/11 Generation -- to stand and acceptthe thanks of a grateful nation.
Thanks to these Americans, we’re moving forward from a position of strength. Having endedour combat mission in Iraq and removed more than 100,000 troops so far, we’ll remove therest of our troops by the end of this year and we will end that war.
  
Having put al Qaeda on the path to defeat, we won’t relent until the job is done. Havingstarted to draw down our forces in Afghanistan, we’ll bring home 33,000 troops by nextsummer and bring home more troops in the coming years. As our mission transitions fromcombat to support, Afghans will take responsibility for their own security, and the longest warin American history will come to a responsible end.
For our troops and military families who've sacrificed so much, this means relief from anunrelenting decade of operations. Today, fewer of our sons and daughters are serving inharm’s way. For so many troops who’ve already done their duty, we’ve put an end to the stoploss. And our soldiers can now look forward to shorter deployments. That means more time athome between deployments, and more time training for the full range of missions that theywill face.
Indeed, despite 10 years of continuous war, it must be said -- America’s military is the bestthat it’s ever been. We saw that most recently in the skill and precision of our brave forceswho helped the Libyan people finally break free from the grip of Moammar Qaddafi. And as wemeet the test that the future will surely bring, including hard fiscal choices here at home,there should be no doubt: The United States of America will keep our military the best-
trained, the best-led, the best-equipped fighting force in history. It will continue to be thebest.
Now, as today’s wars end, as our troops come home, we’re reminded once more of ourresponsibilities to all who have served. The bond between our forces and our citizens must bea sacred trust. And for me and my administration, upholding that trust is not just a matter ofpolicy, it is not about politics; it is a moral obligation. That’s why my very first budget includedthe largest percentage increase to the VA budget in the past 30 years. So far, we’re on trackto have increased funding for Veterans Affairs by 30 percent. And because we passedadvanced appropriations, when Washington politics threatens to shut down the government,as it did last spring, the veterans' medical care that you count on was safe.
And let me say something else about VA funding that you depend on. As a nation, we’re facingsome tough choices as we put our fiscal house in order. But I want to be absolutely clear: Wecannot, we must not, we will not, balance the budget on the backs of our veterans. AsCommander-in-Chief, I won’t allow it.
With these historic investments, we’re making dramatic improvements to veterans' healthcare. We’re improving VA facilities to better serve our women veterans. We’re expandingoutreach and care for our rural veterans, like those that I met during my recent visit toCannon Falls, including two proud Legionnaires -- Tom Newman of Legion Post 620 in Hugo,and Joseph Kidd, Post 164 in Stewartville. Are they here right now? They're out theresomewhere. That was a good lunch, by the way.
  
For our Vietnam veterans, because we declared that three diseases are now presumed to berelated to your exposure to Agent Orange, we’ve begun paying the disability benefits that youneed. For our veterans of the Gulf War, we’re moving forward to address the nine infectiousdiseases that we declared are now presumed to be related to your service in Desert Storm.
At the same time, our outstanding VA Secretary, Ric Shinseki, is working every day to build a21st century VA. Many of our Vietnam vets are already submitting their Agent Orange claimselectronically. Hundreds of you, from all wars, are requesting your benefits online. Thanks tothe new “blue button” on the VA website, you can now share your personal health informationwith your doctors outside of the VA. And we’re making progress in sharing medical recordsbetween DOD and VA. We’re not there yet. I've been pounding on this thing since I came intooffice. We are going to stay on it, we're going to keep at it until our troops and our veteranshave a lifetime electronic medical record that you can keep for your life.
Of course, we’ve still got some work to do. We got to break the backlog of disability claims. Iknow that over the past year, the backlog has actually grown due to new claims from AgentOrange. But let me say this -- and I know Secretary Shinseki agrees -- when our veteranswho fought for our country have to fight just to get the benefits that you’ve already earned,that’s unacceptable. So this is going to remain a key priority for us.
We’re going to keep hiring new claims processors, and we’re going to keep investing in newpaperless systems and keep moving ahead with our innovation competition in which ourdedicated VA employees are developing new ways to process your claims faster. We wantyour claims to be processed not in months, but in days. So the bottom line is this -- yourclaims need to be processed quickly and accurately, the first time. We’re not going to restuntil we get that done. We will not rest.
The same is true for our mission to end homelessness among our veterans. Already, we’vehelped to bring tens of thousands of veterans off the streets. For the first time ever, we’vemade veterans and military families a priority -- not just at the VA, not just at DOD, butacross the federal government. And that includes making sure that federal agencies areworking together so that every veteran who fought for America has a home in America.
We’re working to fulfill our obligations to our 9/11 Generation veterans, especially ourwounded warriors. The constant threat of IEDs has meant a new generation of servicemembers with multiple traumatic injuries, including Traumatic Brain Injury. And thanks toadvanced armor and medical technologies, our troops are surviving injuries that would havebeen fatal in previous wars. So we’re saving more lives, but more American veterans live withsevere wounds for a lifetime. That's why we need to be for them for their lifetime.
We’re giving unprecedented support to our wounded warriors -- especially those withTraumatic Brain Injury. And thanks to the veterans and caregivers legislation I signed intolaw, we’ve started training caregivers so that they can receive the skills and the stipends thatthey need to care for their loved ones.
  
We’re working aggressively to address another signature wound of this war, which has led totoo many fine troops and veterans to take their own lives, and that’s Post-Traumatic StressDisorder. We’re continuing to make major investments -- improving outreach and suicideprevention, hiring and training more mental health counselors, and treating more veteransthan ever before.
The days when depression and PTSD were stigmatized -- those days must end. That’s why Imade the decision to start sending condolence letters to the families of service members whotake their lives while deployed in a combat zone. These Americans did not die because theywere weak. They were warriors. They deserve our respect. Every man and woman in uniform,every veteran, needs to know that your nation will be there to help you stay strong. It’s theright thing to do.
In recent months, we’ve heard new reports of some of our veterans not getting the promptmental health care that they desperately need. And that, too, is unacceptable. If a veteranhas the courage to seek help, then we need to be doing everything in our power to deliver thelifesaving mental care that they need. So Secretary Shinseki and the VA are going to stay onthis. And we'll continue to make it easier for veterans with Post-Traumatic Stress to qualify forVA benefits, regardless of the war that you served in. If you served in a combat theater and aVA doctor confirms a diagnosis of PTSD, that's enough.
Which brings me to the final area where America must meet its obligations to our veterans,and this is a place where we need each other -- and that’s the task of renewing our nation’seconomic strength. After a decade of war, it’s time to focus on nation building here at home.And our veterans, especially our 9/11 veterans, have the skills and the dedication to help leadthe way.
That’s why we’re funding the post-9/11 G.I. Bill, which is now helping more than 500,000veterans and family members go to college, get their degrees, and play their part in movingAmerica forward. It’s why, this fall, we’ll start including vocational training andapprenticeships as well, so veterans can develop the skills to succeed in today’s economy. Andthat’s why I’ve directed the federal government to hire more veterans, including more than100,000 veterans in the past year and a half alone.
But in this tough economy, far too many of our veterans are still unemployed. That’s why I’veproposed a comprehensive initiative to make sure we’re tapping the incredible talents of ourveterans. And it’s got two main parts.
First, we’re going to do more to help our newest veterans find and get that private sector job.We’re going to offer -- we’re going to offer more help with career development and jobsearches. I’ve directed DOD and the VA to create what we’re calling a “reverse boot camp” tohelp our newest veterans prepare for civilian jobs and translate their exceptional military skillsinto industry -- into industry-accepted licenses and credentials.
  
And today I’m calling on every state to pass legislation that makes it easier for our veterans toget the credentials and the jobs for which they are so clearly qualified. This needs to happen,and it needs to happen now.
Second, we’re encouraging the private sector to do its part. So I’ve challenged companiesacross America to hire or train 100,000 unemployed veterans or their spouses. And this buildson the commitments that many companies have already made as part of the Joining ForcesCampaign, championed by the First Lady and the Vice President’s spouse, Dr. Jill Biden:100,000 jobs for veterans and spouses. And to get this done, I’ve proposed a ReturningHeroes Tax Credit for companies that hire unemployed veterans and a Wounded Warrior TaxCredit for companies that hire unemployed veterans with a disability.
When Congress returns from recess, this needs to be at the top of their agenda. For the sakeof our veterans, for the sake of our economy, we need these veterans working andcontributing and creating the new jobs and industries that will keep America competitive inthe 21st century.
These are the obligations we have to each other -- our forces, our veterans, our citizens.These are the responsibilities we must fulfill. Not just when it’s easy, not just when we’re flushwith cash, not just when it’s convenient, but always.
That’s a lesson we learned again this year in the life and in the passing of Frank Buckles, ourlast veteran from the First World War. He passed away at the age of 110. Think about it.Frank lived the American Century. An ambulance driver on the Western Front, he bore witnessto the carnage of the trenches in Europe. Then during the Second World War, he survivedmore than three years in Japanese prisoner of war camps. Then, like so many veterans, hecame home, went to school, pursued a career, started a family, lived a good life on his farm inWest Virginia.
Even in his later years, after turning 100, Frank Buckles still gave back to his country. He’d gospeak to schoolchildren about his extraordinary life. He’d meet and inspire other veterans.And for 80 years, he served as a proud member of the American Legion.
The day he was laid to rest, I ordered the flags be flown at half-staff at the White House, atthe government buildings across the nation, at our embassies around the world. As FrankBuckles lay in honor at Arlington’s memorial chapel, hundreds passed by his flag-drapedcasket in quiet procession. Most were strangers who never knew him, but they knew the storyof his service, and they felt compelled to offer their thanks to this American soldier.
And that afternoon, I had the privilege of going over to Arlington and spending a fewmoments with Frank’s daughter, Susannah, who cared for her father to the very end. And itwas a chance for me to convey the gratitude of an entire nation and to pay my respects to anAmerican who reflected the best of who we are as a people.
  
And, Legionnaires, it was a reminder -- not just to the family and friends of Corporal FrankBuckles, but to the veterans and families of every generation -- no matter when you serve, nomatter how many years ago that you took off the uniform, no matter how long you live as aproud veteran of this country we love, America will never leave your side. America will neverforget. We will always be grateful to you.
God bless you. God bless all our veterans. And God bless the United States of America.
