President Obama:  Hello, Morehouse!  Thank you, everybody.  Please be seated. 
Audience Member:  I love you!
President Obama:  I love you back.  That is why I am here. 
I have to say that it is one of the great honors of my life to be able to address this gatheringhere today.  I want to thank Dr. Wilson for his outstanding leadership, and the Board ofTrustees.  We have Congressman Cedric Richmond and Sanford Bishop -- both proud alumniof this school, as well as Congressman Hank Johnson.  And one of my dear friends and a greatinspiration to us all -- the great John Lewis is here.  We have your outstanding Mayor, Mr.Kasim Reed, in the house.
To all the members of the Morehouse family.  And most of all, congratulations to thisdistinguished group of Morehouse Men -- the Class of 2013.
I have to say that it’s a little hard to follow -- not Dr. Wilson, but a skinny guy with a funnyname.  Betsegaw Tadele -- he’s going to be doing something. 
I also have to say that you all are going to get wet. And I'd be out there with you if I could. But Secret Service gets nervous.  So I'm going to have to stay here, dry.  But know that I'mthere with you in spirit.
  
Some of you are graduating summa cum laude.  Some of you are graduating magna cumlaude.  I know some of you are just graduating, “thank you, Lordy.”  That's appropriatebecause it’s a Sunday.
I see some moms and grandmas here, aunts, in their Sunday best -- although they are upsetabout their hair getting messed up. Michelle would not be sitting in the rain.  She has taughtme about hair.
I want to congratulate all of you -- the parents, the   grandparents, the brothers and sisters,the family and friends who supported these young men in so many ways.  This is your day, aswell.  Just think about it -- your sons, your brothers, your nephews -- they spent the last fouryears far from home and close to Spelman, and yet they are still here today. So you’ve donesomething right.  Graduates, give a big round of applause to your family for everything thatthey’ve done for you.
I know that some of you had to wait in long lines to get into today’s ceremony.  And I wouldapologize, but it did not have anything to do with security.  Those graduates just wanted youto know what it’s like to register for classes here.  And this time of year brings a different kindof stress -- every senior stopping by Gloster Hall over the past week making sure your namewas actually on the list of students who met all the graduation requirements.  If it wasn't onthe list, you had to figure out why.  Was it that library book you lent to that trifling roommatewho didn’t return it?  Was it Dr. Johnson’s policy class?  Did you get enough Crown Forumcredits?
On that last point, I’m going to exercise my power as President to declare this speechsufficient Crown Forum credits for any otherwise eligible student to graduate.  That is mygraduation gift to you.  You have a special dispensation.
Now, graduates, I am humbled to stand here with all of you as an honorary Morehouse Man. I finally made it.  And as I do, I’m mindful of an old saying: “You can always tell a MorehouseMan -- but you can’t tell him much.”  And that makes my task a little more difficult, Isuppose.  But I think it also reflects the sense of pride that’s always been part of this school’stradition. 
Benjamin Mays, who served as the president of Morehouse for almost 30 years, understoodthat tradition better than anybody.  He said -- and I quote -- “It will not be sufficient forMorehouse College, for any college, for that matter, to produce clever graduates… but ratherhonest men, men who can be trusted in public and private life -- men who are sensitive to thewrongs, the sufferings, and the injustices of society and who are willing to acceptresponsibility for correcting [those] ills.”
  
It was that mission -- not just to educate men, but to cultivate good men, strong men, uprightmen -- that brought community leaders together just two years after the end of the CivilWar.  They assembled a list of 37 men, free blacks and freed slaves, who would make up thefirst prospective class of what later became Morehouse College.  Most of those first studentshad a desire to become teachers and preachers -- to better themselves so they could helpothers do the same. 
A century and a half later, times have changed.  But the “Morehouse Mystique” still endures. Some of you probably came here from communities where everybody looked like you.  Othersmay have come here in search of a community.  And I suspect that some of you probably felta little bit of culture shock the first time you came together as a class in King’s Chapel.  All ofa sudden, you weren’t the only high school sports captain, you weren’t the only studentcouncil president.  You were suddenly in a group of high achievers, and that meant you wereexpected to do something more. 
That’s the unique sense of purpose that this place has always infused -- the conviction thatthis is a training ground not only for individual success, but for leadership that can change theworld.  
Dr. King was just 15 years old when he enrolled here at Morehouse.  He was an unknown,undersized, unassuming young freshman who lived at home with his parents.  And I think it’sfair to say he wasn’t the coolest kid on campus -- for the suits he wore, his classmates calledhim “Tweed.”  But his education at Morehouse helped to forge the intellect, the discipline, thecompassion, the soul force that would transform America.  It was here that he was introducedto the writings of Gandhi and Thoreau, and the theory of civil disobedience.  It was here thatprofessors encouraged him to look past the world as it was and fight for the world as it shouldbe.  And it was here, at Morehouse, as Dr. King later wrote, where “I realized thatnobody…was afraid.” 
Not even of some bad weather.  I added on that part.  I know it’s wet out there.  But Dr.Wilson told me you all had a choice and decided to do it out here anyway.  That's a MorehouseMan talking.    
Now, think about it.  For black men in the ‘40s and the ‘50s, the threat of violence, theconstant humiliations, large and small, the uncertainty that you could support a family, thegnawing doubts born of the Jim Crow culture that told you every day that somehow you wereinferior, the temptation to shrink from the world, to accept your place, to avoid risks, to beafraid -- that temptation was necessarily strong. 
And yet, here, under the tutelage of men like Dr. Mays, young Martin learned to be unafraid. And he, in turn, taught others to be unafraid.  And over time, he taught a nation to beunafraid.
  
And over the last 50 years, thanks to the moral force of Dr. King and a Moses generation thatovercame their fear and their cynicism and their despair, barriers have come tumbling down,and new doors of opportunity have swung open, and laws and hearts and minds have beenchanged to the point where someone who looks just like you can somehow come to serve asPresident of these United States of America.
So the history we share should give you hope.  The future we share should give you hope. You’re graduating into an improving job market.  You’re living in a time when advances intechnology and communication put the world at your fingertips.  Your generation is uniquelypoised for success unlike any generation of African Americans that came before it.
But that doesn’t mean we don’t have work -- because if we’re honest with ourselves, we knowthat too few of our brothers have the opportunities that you’ve had here at Morehouse.  Introubled neighborhoods all across this country -- many of them heavily African American --too few of our citizens have role models to guide them.  Communities just a couple miles frommy house in Chicago, communities just a couple miles from here -- they’re places where jobsare still too scarce and wages are still too low; where schools are underfunded and violence ispervasive; where too many of our men spend their youth not behind a desk in a classroom,but hanging out on the streets or brooding behind a jail cell. 
My job, as President, is to advocate for policies that generate more opportunity for everybody-- policies that strengthen the middle class and give more people the chance to climb theirway into the middle class.  Policies that create more good jobs and reduce poverty, andeducate more children, and give more families the security of health care, and protect more ofour children from the horrors of gun violence.  That's my job.  Those are matters of publicpolicy, and it is important for all of us -- black, white and brown -- to advocate for an Americawhere everybody has got a fair shot in life.  Not just some.  Not just a few.
But along with collective responsibilities, we have individual responsibilities.  There are somethings, as black men, we can only do for ourselves.  There are some things, as MorehouseMen, that you are obliged to do for those still left behind.  As Morehouse Men, you now wieldsomething even more powerful than the diploma you’re about to collect -- and that’s thepower of your example.
So what I ask of you today is the same thing I ask of every graduating class I address:  Usethat power for something larger than yourself.  Live up to President Mays’s challenge.  Be“sensitive to the wrongs, the sufferings, and the injustices of society.”  And be “willing toaccept responsibility for correcting [those] ills.”
I know that some of you came to Morehouse from communities where life was about keepingyour head down and looking out for yourself.  Maybe you feel like you escaped, and now youcan take your degree and get that fancy job and the nice house and the nice car -- and neverlook back.  And don’t get me wrong -- with all those student loans you’ve had to take out, Iknow you’ve got to earn some money.
  
With doors open to you that your parents and grandparents could not even imagine, no oneexpects you to take a vow of poverty.  But I will say it betrays a poverty of ambition if all youthink about is what goods you can buy instead of what good you can do.
So, yes, go get that law degree.  But if you do, ask yourself if the only option is to defend therich and the powerful, or if you can also find some time to defend the powerless.  Sure, go getyour MBA, or start that business.  We need black businesses out there.  But ask yourselveswhat broader purpose your business might serve, in putting people to work, or transforming aneighborhood.  The most successful CEOs I know didn’t start out intent just on making money-- rather, they had a vision of how their product or service would change things, and themoney followed.
Some of you may be headed to medical school to become doctors.  But make sure you healfolks in underserved communities who really need it, too.  For generations, certain groups inthis country -- especially African Americans -- have been desperate in need of access toquality, affordable health care.  And as a society, we’re finally beginning to change that. Those of you who are under the age of 26 already have the option to stay on your parent’shealth care plan.  But all of you are heading into an economy where many young peopleexpect not only to have multiple jobs, but multiple careers. 
So starting October 1st, because of the Affordable Care Act -- otherwise known as Obamacare-- you’ll be able to shop for a quality, affordable plan that’s yours and travels with you -- aplan that will insure not only your health, but your dreams if you are sick or get in anaccident.  But we're going to need some doctors to make sure it works, too.  We've got tomake sure everybody has good health in this country.  It’s not just good for you, it’s good forthis country.  So you're going to have to spread the word to your fellow young people. 
Which brings me to a second point:  Just as Morehouse has taught you to expect more ofyourselves, inspire those who look up to you to expect more of themselves.  We know that toomany young men in our community continue to make bad choices.  And I have to say,growing up, I made quite a few myself.  Sometimes I wrote off my own failings as justanother example of the world trying to keep a black man down.  I had a tendency sometimesto make excuses for me not doing the right thing.  But one of the things that all of you havelearned over the last four years is there’s no longer any room for excuses.
I understand there’s a common fraternity creed here at Morehouse: “Excuses are tools of theincompetent used to build bridges to nowhere and monuments of nothingness.”  Well, we’vegot no time for excuses.  Not because the bitter legacy of slavery and segregation havevanished entirely; they have not.  Not because racism and discrimination no longer exist; weknow those are still out there.  It’s just that in today’s hyper-connected, hypercompetitiveworld, with millions of young people from China and India and Brazil -- many of whom startedwith a whole lot less than all of you did -- all of them entering the global workforce alongsideyou, nobody is going to give you anything that you have not earned.
  
Nobody cares how tough your upbringing was.  Nobody cares if you suffered somediscrimination.  And moreover, you have to remember that whatever you’ve gone through, itpales in comparison to the hardships previous generations endured -- and they overcamethem.  And if they overcame them, you can overcome them, too.
You now hail from a lineage and legacy of immeasurably strong men -- men who boretremendous burdens and still laid the stones for the path on which we now walk.  You wearthe mantle of Frederick Douglass and Booker T. Washington, and Ralph Bunche and LangstonHughes, and George Washington Carver and Ralph Abernathy and Thurgood Marshall, and,yes, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.  These men were many things to many people.  And theyknew full well the role that racism played in their lives.  But when it came to their ownaccomplishments and sense of purpose, they had no time for excuses.
Every one of you have a grandma or an uncle or a parent who’s told you that at some point inlife, as an African American, you have to work twice as hard as anyone else if you want to getby.  I think President Mays put it even better:  He said, “Whatever you do, strive to do it sowell that no man living and no man dead, and no man yet to be born can do it any better.”
And I promise you, what was needed in Dr. Mays’s time, that spirit of excellence, and hardwork, and dedication, and no excuses is needed now more than ever.  If you think you canjust get over in this economy just because you have a Morehouse degree, you’re in for a rudeawakening.  But if you stay hungry, if you keep hustling, if you keep on your grind and getother folks to do the same -- nobody can stop you.
And when I talk about pursuing excellence and setting an example, I’m not just talking aboutin your professional life.  One of today’s graduates, Frederick Anderson -- where’s Frederick? Frederick, right here. I know it’s raining, but I'm going to tell about Frederick.  Frederick started his college career in Ohio, only to find out that his high school sweetheart back inGeorgia was pregnant.  So he came back and enrolled in Morehouse to be closer to her. Pretty soon, helping raise a newborn and working night shifts became too much, so he startedtaking business classes at a technical college instead -- doing everything from deliveringnewspapers to buffing hospital floors to support his family.
And then he enrolled at Morehouse a second time.  But even with a job, he couldn’t keep upwith the cost of tuition.  So after getting his degree from that technical school, this father ofthree decided to come back to Morehouse for a third time.  As Frederick says, “God has a planfor my life, and He’s not done with me yet.”
And today, Frederick is a family man, and a working man, and a Morehouse Man.  And that’swhat I’m asking all of you to do:  Keep setting an example for what it means to be a man. Bethe best husband to your wife, or you’re your boyfriend, or your partner.  Be the best fatheryou can be to your children.  Because nothing is more important.
  
I was raised by a heroic single mom, wonderful grandparents -- made incredible sacrifices forme.  And I know there are moms and grandparents here today who did the same thing for allof you.  But I sure wish I had had a father who was not only present, but involved.  Didn’tknow my dad.  And so my whole life, I’ve tried to be for Michelle and my girls what my fatherwas not for my mother and me.  I want to break that cycle where a father is not at home --where a father is not helping to raise that son or daughter.  I want to be a better father, abetter husband, a better man.
It’s hard work that demands your constant attention and frequent sacrifice.  And I promiseyou, Michelle will tell you I’m not perfect.  She’s got a long list of my imperfections.  Evennow, I’m still practicing, I'm still learning, still getting corrected in terms of how to be a finehusband and a good father.  But I will tell you this:  Everything else is unfulfilled if we fail atfamily, if we fail at that responsibility.
I know that when I am on my deathbed someday, I will not be thinking about any particularlegislation I passed; I will not be thinking about a policy I promoted; I will not be thinkingabout the speech I gave, I will not be thinking the Nobel Prize I received.  I will be thinkingabout that walk I took with my daughters.  I'll be thinking about a lazy afternoon with mywife. I'll be thinking about sitting around the dinner table and seeing them happy and healthyand knowing that they were loved.  And I'll be thinking about whether I did right by all ofthem.
So be a good role model, set a good example for that young brother coming up.  If you knowsomebody who’s not on point, go back and bring that brother along -- those who’ve been leftbehind, who haven’t had the same opportunities we have -- they need to hear from you. You’ve got to be engaged on the barbershops, on the basketball court, at church, spend timeand energy and presence to give people opportunities and a chance.  Pull them up, exposethem, support their dreams.  Don't put them down.
We’ve got to teach them just like what we have to learn, what it means to be a man -- toserve your city like Maynard Jackson; to shape the culture like Spike Lee; to be like ChesterDavenport, one of the first people to integrate the University of Georgia Law School.  When hegot there, nobody would sit next to him in class.  But Chester didn’t mind.  Later on, he said,“It was the thing for me to do.  Someone needed to be the first.”  And today, Chester is herecelebrating his 50th reunion.  Where is Chester Davenport?  He’s here.
So if you’ve had role models, fathers, brothers like that -- thank them today. And if youhaven’t, commit yourself to being that man to somebody else.
And finally, as you do these things, do them not just for yourself, but don't even do them justfor the African American community.  I want you to set your sights higher.  At the turn of thelast century, W.E.B. DuBois spoke about the “talented tenth” -- a class of highly educated,socially conscious leaders in the black community.  But it’s not just the African Americancommunity that needs you.  The country needs you.  The world needs you.
  
As Morehouse Men, many of you know what it’s like to be an outsider; know what it’s like tobe marginalized; know what it’s like to feel the sting of discrimination.  And that’s anexperience that a lot of Americans share.  Hispanic Americans know that feeling whensomebody asks them where they come from or tell them to go back.  Gay and lesbianAmericans feel it when a stranger passes judgment on their parenting skills or the love thatthey share.  Muslim Americans feel it when they’re stared at with suspicion because of theirfaith.  Any woman who knows the injustice of earning less pay for doing the same work -- sheknows what it’s like to be on the outside looking in.
So your experiences give you special insight that today’s leaders need.  If you tap into thatexperience, it should endow you with empathy -- the understanding of what it’s like to walk insomebody else’s shoes, to see through their eyes, to know what it’s like when you're not bornon 3rd base, thinking you hit a triple.  It should give you the ability to connect.  It should giveyou a sense of compassion and what it means to overcome barriers.
And I will tell you, Class of 2013, whatever success I have achieved, whatever positions ofleadership I have held have depended less on Ivy League degrees or SAT scores or GPAs, andhave instead been due to that sense of connection and empathy -- the special obligation I felt,as a black man like you, to help those who need it most, people who didn’t have theopportunities that I had -- because there but for the grace of God, go I -- I might have beenin their shoes.  I might have been in prison.  I might have been unemployed.  I might nothave been able to support a family.  And that motivates me.
So it’s up to you to widen your circle of concern -- to care about justice for everybody, white,black and brown. Everybody.  Not just in your own community, but also across this countryand around the world.  To make sure everyone has a voice, and everybody gets a seat at thetable; that everybody, no matter what you look like or where you come from, what your lastname is -- it doesn’t matter, everybody gets a chance to walk through those doors ofopportunity if they are willing to work hard enough.
When Leland Shelton was four years old -- where’s Leland?  Stand up, Leland.  When LelandShelton was four years old, social services took him away from his mama, put him in the careof his grandparents.  By age 14, he was in the foster care system.  Three years after that,Leland enrolled in Morehouse.  And today he is graduating Phi Beta Kappa on his way toHarvard Law School.  But he’s not stopping there. As a member of the National Foster CareYouth and Alumni Policy Council, he plans to use his law degree to make sure kids like himdon’t fall through the cracks.  And it won’t matter whether they’re black kids or brown kids orwhite kids or Native American kids, because he’ll understand what they’re going through.  Andhe'll be fighting for them.  He'll be in their corner.  That's leadership.  That's a Morehouse Manright there.
  
That’s what we’ve come to expect from you, Morehouse -- a legacy of leaders -- not just inour black community, but for the entire American community.  To recognize the burdens youcarry with you, but to resist the temptation to use them as excuses.  To transform the way wethink about manhood, and set higher standards for ourselves and for others.  To besuccessful, but also to understand that each of us has responsibilities not just to ourselves,but to one another and to future generations.  Men who refuse to be afraid.  Men who refuseto be afraid.
Members of the Class of 2013, you are heirs to a great legacy.  You have within you thatsame courage and that same strength, the same resolve as the men who came before you. That’s what being a Morehouse Man is all about.  That’s what being an American is all about.
Success may not come quickly or easily.  But if you strive to do what’s right, if you workharder and dream bigger, if you set an example in your own lives and do your part to helpmeet the challenges of our time, then I’m confident that, together, we will continue the never-
ending task of perfecting our union.
Congratulations, Class of 2013.  God bless you.  God bless Morehouse.
And God bless the United States of America.
