It is a rare honor in this life to follow one of your heroes.  And John Lewis is one of my heroes.
Now, I have to imagine that when a younger John Lewis woke up that morning 50 years agoand made his way to Brown Chapel, heroics were not on his mind.  A day like this was not onhis mind.  Young folks with bedrolls and backpacks were milling about.  Veterans of themovement trained newcomers in the tactics of non-violence -- the right way to protectyourself when attacked.  A doctor described what tear gas does to the body, while marchersscribbled down instructions for contacting their loved ones.  The air was thick with doubt,anticipation and fear.  And they comforted themselves with the final verse of the final hymnthey sung:
No matter what may be the test, God will take care of you;lean, weary one, upon His breast, God will take care of you.1
And then, his knapsack stocked with an apple, a toothbrush, and a book on government -- allyou need for a night behind bars -- John Lewis led them out of the church on a mission tochange America.
  
President and Mrs. Bush, Governor Bentley, Mayor Evans, Sewell, Reverend Strong, membersof Congress, elected officials, foot soldiers, friends, fellow Americans:
As John noted, there are places and moments in America where this nation’s destiny has beendecided.  Many are sites of war -- Concord and Lexington, Appomattox, Gettysburg.  Othersare sites that symbolize the daring of America’s character -- Independence Hall and SenecaFalls, Kitty Hawk and Cape Canaveral.
Selma is such a place.  In one afternoon 50 years ago, so much of our turbulent history -- thestain of slavery and anguish of civil war; the yoke of segregation and tyranny of Jim Crow; thedeath of four little girls in Birmingham; and the dream of a Baptist preacher -- all that historymet on this bridge.2
It was not a clash of armies, but a clash of wills; a contest to determine the true meaning ofAmerica.  And because of men and women like John Lewis, Joseph Lowery, Hosea Williams,Amelia Boynton, Diane Nash, Ralph Abernathy, C.T. Vivian, Andrew Young, FredShuttlesworth, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and so many others, the idea of a just America anda fair America, an inclusive America, and a generous America -- that idea ultimatelytriumphed.
As is true across the landscape of American history, we cannot examine this moment inisolation.  The march on Selma was part of a broader campaign that spanned generations; theleaders that day part of a long line of heroes.
We gather here to celebrate them.  We gather here to honor the courage of ordinaryAmericans willing to endure billy clubs and the chastening rod; tear gas and the tramplinghoof; men and women who despite the gush of blood and splintered bone would stay true totheir North Star and keep marching towards justice.
They did as Scripture instructed:  “Rejoice in hope, be patient in tribulation, be constant inprayer.”  And in the days to come, they went back again and again.  When the trumpet callsounded for more to join, the people came -- black and white, young and old, Christian andJew, waving the American flag and singing the same anthems full of faith and hope.  A whitenewsman, Bill Plante, who covered the marches then and who is with us here today, quippedthat the growing number of white people lowered the quality of the singing.  To those whomarched, though, those old gospel songs must have never sounded so sweet.
In time, their chorus would well up and reach President Johnson.  And he would send themprotection, and speak to the nation, echoing their call for America and the world to hear:  “Weshall overcome.”  What enormous faith these men and women had.  Faith in God, but alsofaith in America. 
  
The Americans who crossed this bridge, they were not physically imposing.  But they gavecourage to millions.  They held no elected office.  But they led a nation.  They marched asAmericans who had endured hundreds of years of brutal violence, countless daily indignities --but they didn’t seek special treatment, just the equal treatment promised to them almost acentury before.
What they did here will reverberate through the ages.  Not because the change they won waspreordained; not because their victory was complete; but because they proved that nonviolentchange is possible, that love and hope can conquer hate.
As we commemorate their achievement, we are well-served to remember that at the time ofthe marches, many in power condemned rather than praised them.  Back then, they werecalled Communists, or half-breeds, or outside agitators, sexual and moral degenerates, andworse -- they were called everything but the name their parents gave them.  Their faith wasquestioned; their lives were threatened; their patriotism challenged.
And yet, what could be more American than what happened in this place?  What could moreprofoundly vindicate the idea of America than plain and humble people -- unsung, thedowntrodden, the dreamers not of high station, not born to wealth or privilege, not of onereligious tradition but many, coming together to shape their country’s course? 
What greater expression of faith in the American experiment than this, what greater form ofpatriotism is there than the belief that America is not yet finished, that we are strong enoughto be self-critical, that each successive generation can look upon our imperfections and decidethat it is in our power to remake this nation to more closely align with our highest ideals?
That’s why Selma is not some outlier in the American experience.  That’s why it’s not amuseum or a static monument to behold from a distance.  It is instead the manifestation of acreed written into our founding documents:  “We the People…in order to form a more perfectunion.”  “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.”
These are not just words.  They’re a living thing, a call to action, a roadmap for citizenshipand an insistence in the capacity of free men and women to shape our own destiny.  Forfounders like Franklin and Jefferson, for leaders like Lincoln and FDR, the success of ourexperiment in self-government rested on engaging all of our citizens in this work.  And that’swhat we celebrate here in Selma.  That’s what this movement was all about, one leg in ourlong journey toward freedom.
The American instinct that led these young men and women to pick up the torch and crossthis bridge, that’s the same instinct that moved patriots to choose revolution over tyranny. It’s the same instinct that drew immigrants from across oceans and the Rio Grande; the sameinstinct that led women to reach for the ballot, workers to organize against an unjust statusquo; the same instinct that led us to plant a flag at Iwo Jima and on the surface of the Moon.
  
It’s the idea held by generations of citizens who believed that America is a constant work inprogress; who believed that loving this country requires more than singing its praises oravoiding uncomfortable truths.  It requires the occasional disruption, the willingness to speakout for what is right, to shake up the status quo.  That’s America.
That’s what makes us unique.  That’s what cements our reputation as a beacon ofopportunity.  Young people behind the Iron Curtain would see Selma and eventually tear downthat wall.  Young people in Soweto would hear Bobby Kennedy talk about ripples of hope andeventually banish the scourge of apartheid.  Young people in Burma went to prison ratherthan submit to military rule.  They saw what John Lewis had done.  From the streets of Tunisto the Maidan in Ukraine, this generation of young people can draw strength from this place,where the powerless could change the world’s greatest power and push their leaders toexpand the boundaries of freedom. 
They saw that idea made real right here in Selma, Alabama.  They saw that idea manifestitself here in America.
Because of campaigns like this, a Voting Rights Act was passed.  Political and economic andsocial barriers came down.  And the change these men and women wrought is visible heretoday in the presence of African Americans who run boardrooms, who sit on the bench, whoserve in elected office from small towns to big cities; from the Congressional Black Caucus allthe way to the Oval Office.
Because of what they did, the doors of opportunity swung open not just for black folks, but forevery American.  Women marched through those doors.  Latinos marched through thosedoors.  Asian Americans, gay Americans, Americans with disabilities -- they all came throughthose doors.  Their endeavors gave the entire South the chance to rise again, not byreasserting the past, but by transcending the past. 
What a glorious thing, Dr. King might say.  And what a solemn debt we owe.  Which leads usto ask, just how might we repay that debt?
First and foremost, we have to recognize that one day’s commemoration, no matter howspecial, is not enough.  If Selma taught us anything, it’s that our work is never done.  TheAmerican experiment in self-government gives work and purpose to each generation.
Selma teaches us, as well, that action requires that we shed our cynicism.  For when it comesto the pursuit of justice, we can afford neither complacency nor despair.
Just this week, I was asked whether I thought the Department of Justice’s Ferguson reportshows that, with respect to race, little has changed in this country.  And I understood thequestion; the report’s narrative was sadly familiar.  It evoked the kind of abuse and disregardfor citizens that spawned the Civil Rights Movement.
  
But I rejected the notion that nothing’s changed.  What happened in Ferguson may not beunique, but it’s no longer endemic.  It’s no longer sanctioned by law or by custom.  Andbefore the Civil Rights Movement, it most surely was.
We do a disservice to the cause of justice by intimating that bias and discrimination areimmutable, that racial division is inherent to America.  If you think nothing’s changed in thepast 50 years, ask somebody who lived through the Selma or Chicago or Los Angeles of the1950s.  Ask the female CEO who once might have been assigned to the secretarial pool ifnothing’s changed.  Ask your gay friend if it’s easier to be out and proud in America now thanit was thirty years ago.  To deny this progress, this hard-won progress -– our progress --would be to rob us of our own agency, our own capacity, our responsibility to do what we canto make America better. 
Of course, a more common mistake is to suggest that Ferguson is an isolated incident; thatracism is banished; that the work that drew men and women to Selma is now complete, andthat whatever racial tensions remain are a consequence of those seeking to play the “racecard” for their own purposes.  We don’t need the Ferguson report to know that’s not true.  Wejust need to open our eyes, and our ears, and our hearts to know that this nation’s racialhistory still casts its long shadow upon us. 
We know the march is not yet over.  We know the race is not yet won.  We know thatreaching that blessed destination where we are judged, all of us, by the content of ourcharacter requires admitting as much, facing up to the truth.  “We are capable of bearing agreat burden,” James Baldwin once wrote, “once we discover that the burden is reality andarrive where reality is.” 
There’s nothing America can’t handle if we actually look squarely at the problem.  And this iswork for all Americans, not just some.  Not just whites.  Not just blacks.  If we want to honorthe courage of those who marched that day, then all of us are called to possess their moralimagination.  All of us will need to feel as they did the fierce urgency of now.  All of us need torecognize as they did that change depends on our actions, on our attitudes, the things weteach our children.  And if we make such an effort, no matter how hard it may sometimesseem, laws can be passed, and consciences can be stirred, and consensus can be built.
With such an effort, we can make sure our criminal justice system serves all and not justsome.  Together, we can raise the level of mutual trust that policing is built on -- the idea thatpolice officers are members of the community they risk their lives to protect, and citizens inFerguson and New York and Cleveland, they just want the same thing young people heremarched for 50 years ago -– the protection of the law.  Together, we can address unfairsentencing and overcrowded prisons, and the stunted circumstances that rob too many boysof the chance to become men, and rob the nation of too many men who could be good dads,and good workers, and good neighbors.
  
With effort, we can roll back poverty and the roadblocks to opportunity.  Americans don’taccept a free ride for anybody, nor do we believe in equality of outcomes.  But we do expectequal opportunity.  And if we really mean it, if we’re not just giving lip service to it, but if wereally mean it and are willing to sacrifice for it, then, yes, we can make sure every child getsan education suitable to this new century, one that expands imaginations and lifts sights andgives those children the skills they need.  We can make sure every person willing to work hasthe dignity of a job, and a fair wage, and a real voice, and sturdier rungs on that ladder intothe middle class.
And with effort, we can protect the foundation stone of our democracy for which so manymarched across this bridge -- and that is the right to vote.  Right now, in 2015, 50 years afterSelma, there are laws across this country designed to make it harder for people to vote.  Aswe speak, more of such laws are being proposed.  Meanwhile, the Voting Rights Act, theculmination of so much blood, so much sweat and tears, the product of so much sacrifice inthe face of wanton violence, the Voting Rights Act stands weakened, its future subject topolitical rancor.
How can that be?  The Voting Rights Act was one of the crowning achievements of ourdemocracy, the result of Republican and Democratic efforts. President Reagan signed itsrenewal when he was in office.  President George W. Bush signed its renewal when he was inoffice. One hundred members of Congress have come here today to honor people who werewilling to die for the right to protect it.  If we want to honor this day, let that hundred go backto Washington and gather four hundred more, and together, pledge to make it their mission torestore that law this year.  That’s how we honor those on this bridge.
Of course, our democracy is not the task of Congress alone, or the courts alone, or even thePresident alone.  If every new voter-suppression law was struck down today, we would stillhave, here in America, one of the lowest voting rates among free peoples.  Fifty years ago,registering to vote here in Selma and much of the South meant guessing the number ofjellybeans in a jar, the number of bubbles on a bar of soap.  It meant risking your dignity, andsometimes, your life. 
What’s our excuse today for not voting?  How do we so casually discard the right for which somany fought?  How do we so fully give away our power, our voice, in shaping America’sfuture?  Why are we pointing to somebody else when we could take the time just to go to thepolling places?  We give away our power.   
Fellow marchers, so much has changed in 50 years.  We have endured war and we’vefashioned peace.  We’ve seen technological wonders that touch every aspect of our lives.  Wetake for granted conveniences that our parents could have scarcely imagined.  But what hasnot changed is the imperative of citizenship; that willingness of a 26-year-old deacon, or aUnitarian minister, or a young mother of five to decide they loved this country so much thatthey’d risk everything to realize its promise.
  
That’s what it means to love America.  That’s what it means to believe in America.  That’swhat it means when we say America is exceptional. 
For we were born of change.  We broke the old aristocracies, declaring ourselves entitled notby bloodline, but endowed by our Creator with certain inalienable rights.  We secure our rightsand responsibilities through a system of self-government, of and by and for the people. That’s why we argue and fight with so much passion and conviction -- because we know ourefforts matter.  We know America is what we make of it.
Look at our history:
We are Lewis and Clark and Sacajawea, pioneers who braved the unfamiliar, followedby a stampede of farmers and miners, and entrepreneurs and hucksters.  That’s ourspirit.  That’s who we are.
We are Sojourner Truth and Fannie Lou Hamer, women who could do as much as anyman and then some.  And we’re Susan B. Anthony, who shook the system until the lawreflected that truth.  That is our character.
We’re the immigrants who stowed away on ships to reach these shores, the huddledmasses yearning to breathe free -- Holocaust survivors, Soviet defectors, the Lost Boysof Sudan.  We’re the hopeful strivers who cross the Rio Grande because we want ourkids to know a better life.  That’s how we came to be.
We’re the slaves who built the White House and the economy of the South.  We’re theranch hands and cowboys who opened up the West, and countless laborers who laidrail, and raised skyscrapers, and organized for workers’ rights.
We’re the fresh-faced GIs who fought to liberate a continent.  And we’re the TuskeegeeAirmen, and the Navajo code-talkers, and the Japanese Americans who fought for thiscountry even as their own liberty had been denied. 
We’re the firefighters who rushed into those buildings on 9/11, the volunteers whosigned up to fight in Afghanistan and Iraq.  We’re the gay Americans whose blood ranin the streets of San Francisco and New York, just as blood ran down this bridge.
We are storytellers, writers, poets, artists who abhor unfairness, and despisehypocrisy, and give voice to the voiceless, and tell truths that need to be told.
We’re the inventors of gospel and jazz and blues, bluegrass and country, and hip-hopand rock and roll, and our very own sound with all the sweet sorrow and reckless joy offreedom.
  
We are Jackie Robinson, enduring scorn and spiked cleats and pitches coming straightto his head, and stealing home in the World Series anyway.
We are the people Langston Hughes wrote of who “build our temples for tomorrow,strong as we know how.”  We are the people Emerson wrote of, “who for truth andhonor’s sake stand fast and suffer long;” who are “never tired, so long as we can seefar enough.”
That’s what America is.  Not stock photos or airbrushed history, or feeble attempts to definesome of us as more American than others.  We respect the past, but we don’t pine for thepast.  We don’t fear the future; we grab for it.  America is not some fragile thing.  We arelarge, in the words of Whitman, containing multitudes.  We are boisterous and diverse and fullof energy, perpetually young in spirit.  That’s why someone like John Lewis at the ripe old ageof 25 could lead a mighty march. 
And that’s what the young people here today and listening all across the country must takeaway from this day.  You are America.  Unconstrained by habit and convention. Unencumbered by what is, because you’re ready to seize what ought to be. 
For everywhere in this country, there are first steps to be taken, there’s new ground to cover,there are more bridges to be crossed.  And it is you, the young and fearless at heart, the mostdiverse and educated generation in our history, who the nation is waiting to follow.
Because Selma shows us that America is not the project of any one person.  Because thesingle-most powerful word in our democracy is the word “We.”  “We The People.”  “We ShallOvercome.”  “Yes We Can.”  That word is owned by no one.  It belongs to everyone.  Oh, whata glorious task we are given, to continually try to improve this great nation of ours.
Fifty years from Bloody Sunday, our march is not yet finished, but we’re getting closer.  Twohundred and thirty-nine years after this nation’s founding our union is not yet perfect, but weare getting closer.  Our job’s easier because somebody already got us through that first mile. Somebody already got us over that bridge.  When it feels the road is too hard, when the torchwe’ve been passed feels too heavy, we will remember these early travelers, and draw strengthfrom their example, and hold firmly the words of the prophet Isaiah:  
Those who hope in the Lord will renew their strength.  They will soar on wings likeeagles.  They will run and not grow weary.  They will walk and not be faint.3
We honor those who walked so we could run.  We must run so our children soar.  And we willnot grow weary.  For we believe in the power of an awesome God, and we believe in thiscountry’s sacred promise.
  
May He bless those warriors of justice no longer with us, and bless the United States ofAmerica.
Thank you, everybody.
1 From a hymn entitled "God Will Take Care of You" with lyrics by Civilla D. Martin and music by W. Stillman Martin. It is the third entry in the1906 hymnal Songs of Redemption and Praise compiled by John A. Davis and John Ralston Clements. Sheet music for this hymn has beendigitized by and publicly preserved at Internet Archive.
2 Edmund Pettus Bridge, Wikipedia entry: "The Edmund Pettus Bridge is a bridge that carries U.S. Route 80 across the Alabama River inSelma, Alabama. Built in 1940, it is named for Edmund Winston Pettus, a former Confederate brigadier general, Democratic Party U.S. Senatorfrom Alabama and Grand Dragon of the Alabama Ku Klux Klan...The Edmund Pettus Bridge was the site of the conflict of Bloody Sunday onMarch 7, 1965, when armed policemen attacked peaceful civil rights demonstrators who were attempting to march to the Alabama state capitalof Montgomery. The bridge was declared a National Historic Landmark on March 11, 2013." (Truncated from original; retrieved and posted 12March 2015)
3 Isaiah: 40:31
