Lost in the news of the week was a headline that ought to be a source of concern for everyAmerican.  It said, “Many Nations Passing U.S. in Education.”  Now, debates in Washingtontend to be consumed with the politics of the moment: who’s up in the daily polls; whose partystands to gain in November.  But what matters to you -- what matters to our country -- is notwhat happens in the next election, but what we do to lift up the next generation.  And the factis, there are few issues that speak more directly to our long term success as a nation thanissues concerning the education we provide to our children. 
Our prosperity in the 20th century was fueled by an education system that helped grow themiddle class and unleash the talents of our people more fully and widely than at any time inour history.  We built schools and focused on the teaching of math and science.  We helped ageneration of veterans go to college through the GI Bill.  We led the globe in producing collegegraduates, and in turn we led in producing ground-breaking technologies and scientificdiscoveries that lifted living standards and set us apart as the world’s engine of innovation.

Of course, other nations recognize this, and are looking to gain an edge in the globalmarketplace by investing in better schools, supporting teachers, and committing to clearstandards that will produce graduates with more skills.  Our competitors understand that thenation that out-educates us today will out-compete us tomorrow.  Yet, too often we havefailed to make inroads in reforming and strengthening our public education system -- thedebate mired in worn arguments hurled across entrenched divides. 
As a result, over the last few decades, we’ve lost ground.  One assessment shows Americanfifteen year olds no longer even near the top in math and science when compared to theirpeers around the world.  As referenced in the news report I mentioned, we’ve now fallenbehind most wealthy countries in our high school graduation rates.  And while we once led theworld in the proportion of college graduates we produced, today we no longer do. 
Not only does that risk our leadership as a nation, it consigns millions of Americans to a lesserfuture.  For we know that the level of education a person attains is increasingly a prerequisitefor success and a predictor of the income that person will earn throughout his or her life. Beyond the economic statistics is a less tangible but no less painful reality: unless we takeaction -- unless we step up -- there are countless children who will never realize their fulltalent and potential. 
I don’t accept that future for them.  And I don’t accept that future for the United States ofAmerica.  That’s why we’re engaged in a historic effort to redeem and improve  our public schools: to raise the expectations for our students and for ourselves, to recognize and rewardexcellence, to improve performance in troubled schools, and to give our kids and our countrythe best chance to succeed in a changing world.
Under the leadership of an outstanding Education Secretary, Arne Duncan, we launched aRace to the Top, through which states compete for funding by committing to reform andraising standards, by rewarding good teaching, by supporting the development of betterassessments to measure results, and by emphasizing math and science to help preparechildren for college and careers. 
And on Monday, my administration will send to Congress our blueprint for an updatedElementary and Secondary Education Act to overhaul No Child Left Behind.  What this planrecognizes is that while the federal government can play a leading role in encouraging thereforms and high standards we need, the impetus for that change will come from states, andfrom local schools and school districts.  So, yes, we set a high bar -- but we also provideeducators the flexibility to reach it. 
Under these guidelines, schools that achieve excellence or show real progress will berewarded, and local districts will be encouraged to commit to change in schools that areclearly letting their students down.  For the majority of schools that fall in between -- schoolsthat do well but could do better -- we will encourage continuous improvement to help keepour young people on track for a bright future: prepared for the jobs of the 21st century.

And because the most important factor in a child’s success is the person standing at the frontof the classroom, we will better prepare teachers, support teachers, and encourage teachersto stay in the field.  In short, we’ll treat the people who educate our sons and daughters likethe professionals they are.
Through this plan we are setting an ambitious goal: All students should graduate from highschool prepared for college and a career -- no matter who you are or where you come from. Achieving this goal will be difficult. It will take time.  And it will require the skills, talents, anddedication of many: principals, teachers, parents, students.  But this effort is essential for ourchildren and for our country.  And while there will always be those cynics who claim it can’t bedone, at our best, we know that America has always risen to the challenges that we’ve faced. This challenge is no different. 
As a nation, we are engaged in many important endeavors: improving the economy,reforming the health care system, encouraging innovation in energy and other growthindustries of the 21st century.  But our success in these efforts -- and our success in thefuture as a people -- will ultimately depend on what happens long before an entrepreneuropens his doors, or a nurse walks the rounds, or a scientist steps into her laboratory.  Ourfuture is determined each and every day, when our children enter the classroom, ready tolearn and brimming with promise. 
It’s that promise we must help them fulfill.  
Thank you.