Giving all praise and honor to God.
The Bible calls us to hope.  To persevere, and have faith in things not seen.
“They were still living by faith when they died,” Scripture tells us:
They did not receive the things promised; they only saw them and welcomed themfrom a distance, admitting that they were foreigners and strangers on Earth.1
We are here today to remember a man of God who lived by faith.  A man who believed inthings not seen.  A man who believed there were better days ahead, off in the distance.  Aman of service who persevered, knowing full well he would not receive all those things he waspromised, because he believed his efforts would deliver a better life for those who followed.
To Jennifer, his beloved wife; to Eliana and Malana, his beautiful, wonderful daughters; to theMother Emanuel family and the people of Charleston, the people of South Carolina.
  
I cannot claim to have the good fortune to know Reverend Pinckney well.  But I did have thepleasure of knowing him and meeting him here in South Carolina, back when we were both alittle bit younger.  Back when I didn’t have visible grey hair.  The first thing I noticed was hisgraciousness, his smile, his reassuring baritone, his deceptive sense of humor -- all qualitiesthat helped him wear so effortlessly a heavy burden of expectation.
Friends of his remarked this week that when Clementa Pinckney entered a room, it was likethe future arrived; that even from a young age, folks knew he was special.  Anointed.  He wasthe progeny of a long line of the faithful -- a family of preachers who spread God’s word, afamily of protesters who sowed change to expand voting rights and desegregate the South. Clem heard their instruction, and he did not forsake their teaching.
He was in the pulpit by 13, pastor by 18, public servant by 23.  He did not exhibit any of thecockiness of youth, nor youth’s insecurities; instead, he set an example worthy of his position,wise beyond his years, in his speech, in his conduct, in his love, faith, and purity.
As a senator, he represented a sprawling swath of the Lowcountry, a place that has long beenone of the most neglected in America.  A place still wracked by poverty and inadequateschools; a place where children can still go hungry and the sick can go without treatment.  Aplace that needed somebody like Clem.
His position in the minority party meant the odds of winning more resources for hisconstituents were often long.  His calls for greater equity were too often unheeded, the voteshe cast were sometimes lonely.  But he never gave up.  He stayed true to his convictions.  Hewould not grow discouraged.  After a full day at the capitol, he’d climb into his car and head tothe church to draw sustenance from his family, from his ministry, from the community thatloved and needed him.  There he would fortify his faith, and imagine what might be.
Reverend Pinckney embodied a politics that was neither mean, nor small.  He conductedhimself quietly, and kindly, and diligently.  He encouraged progress not by pushing his ideasalone, but by seeking out your ideas, partnering with you to make things happen.  He was fullof empathy and fellow feeling, able to walk in somebody else’s shoes and see through theireyes.  No wonder one of his Senate colleagues remembered Senator Pinckney as “the mostgentle of the 46 of us -- the best of the 46 of us.”
Clem was often asked why he chose to be a pastor and a public servant.  But the person whoasked probably didn’t know the history of the AME church.  As our brothers and sisters in theAME church know, we don't make those distinctions. “Our calling,” Clem once said, “is not justwithin the walls of the congregation, but…the life and community in which our congregationresides.”  
  
He embodied the idea that our Christian faith demands deeds and not just words; that the“sweet hour of prayer” actually lasts the whole week long -- that to put our faith in action ismore than individual salvation, it's about our collective salvation; that to feed the hungry andclothe the naked and house the homeless is not just a call for isolated charity but theimperative of a just society.
What a good man.  Sometimes I think that's the best thing to hope for when you're eulogized-- after all the words and recitations and resumes are read, to just say someone was a goodman.  
You don’t have to be of high station to be a good man.  Preacher by 13.  Pastor by 18.  Publicservant by 23.  What a life Clementa Pinckney lived.  What an example he set.  What a modelfor his faith.  And then to lose him at 41 -- slain in his sanctuary with eight wonderfulmembers of his flock, each at different stages in life but bound together by a commoncommitment to God.  
Cynthia Hurd.  Susie Jackson.  Ethel Lance.  DePayne Middleton-Doctor.  Tywanza Sanders. Daniel L. Simmons.  Sharonda Coleman-Singleton.  Myra Thompson.  Good people.  Decentpeople. God-fearing people.  People so full of life and so full of kindness.  People who ran therace, who persevered.  People of great faith.
To the families of the fallen, the nation shares in your grief.  Our pain cuts that much deeperbecause it happened in a church.  The church is and always has been the center of African-
American life -- a place to call our own in a too often hostile world, a sanctuary from so manyhardships.
Over the course of centuries, black churches served as “hush harbors” where slaves couldworship in safety; praise houses where their free descendants could gather and shouthallelujah -- rest stops for the weary along the Underground Railroad; bunkers for the footsoldiers of the Civil Rights Movement.  They have been, and continue to be, communitycenters where we organize for jobs and justice; places of scholarship and network; placeswhere children are loved and fed and kept out of harm’s way, and told that they are beautifuland smart -- and taught that they matter.  That’s what happens in church.  
That’s what the black church means.  Our beating heart.  The place where our dignity as apeople is inviolate.  When there’s no better example of this tradition than Mother Emanuel -- achurch built by blacks seeking liberty, burned to the ground because its founder sought to endslavery, only to rise up again, a Phoenix from these ashes.  
When there were laws banning all-black church gatherings, services happened here anyway,in defiance of unjust laws.  When there was a righteous movement to dismantle Jim Crow, Dr.Martin Luther King, Jr. preached from its pulpit, and marches began from its steps.  A sacredplace, this church.
  
Not just for blacks, not just for Christians, but for every American who cares about the steadyexpansion -- of human rights and human dignity in this country; a foundation stone for libertyand justice for all.  That’s what the church meant.   
We do not know whether the killer of Reverend Pinckney and eight others knew all of thishistory.  But he surely sensed the meaning of his violent act.  It was an act that drew on along history of bombs and arson and shots fired at churches, not random, but as a means ofcontrol, a way to terrorize and oppress.  An act that he imagined would incite fear andrecrimination; violence and suspicion.  An act that he presumed would deepen divisions thattrace back to our nation’s original sin.   Oh, but God works in mysterious ways.  God has different ideas.  
He didn’t know he was being used by God.  Blinded by hatred, the alleged killer could not seethe grace surrounding Reverend Pinckney and that Bible study group -- the light of love thatshone as they opened the church doors and invited a stranger to join in their prayer circle. The alleged killer could have never anticipated the way the families of the fallen wouldrespond when they saw him in court -- in the midst of unspeakable grief, with words offorgiveness.  He couldn’t imagine that.  
The alleged killer could not imagine how the city of Charleston, under the good and wiseleadership of Mayor Riley -- how the state of South Carolina, how the United States ofAmerica would respond -- not merely with revulsion at his evil act, but with big-heartedgenerosity and, more importantly, with a thoughtful introspection and self-examination thatwe so rarely see in public life.
Blinded by hatred, he failed to comprehend what Reverend Pinckney so well understood -- thepower of God’s grace.  
This whole week, I’ve been reflecting on this idea of grace.  The grace of the families who lostloved ones.  The grace that Reverend Pinckney would preach about in his sermons.  The gracedescribed in one of my favorite hymnals -- the one we all know:  Amazing grace, how sweetthe sound that saved a wretch like me.  I once was lost, but now I’m found; was blind butnow I see.  
According to the Christian tradition, grace is not earned.  Grace is not merited.  It’s notsomething we deserve.  Rather, grace is the free and benevolent favor of God -- asmanifested in the salvation of sinners and the bestowal of blessings.  Grace.  
As a nation, out of this terrible tragedy, God has visited grace upon us, for he has allowed usto see where we’ve been blind.  He has given us the chance, where we’ve been lost, to findour best selves.  We may not have earned it, this grace, with our rancor and complacency,and short-sightedness and fear of each other -- but we got it all the same.
  
He gave it to us anyway.  He’s once more given us grace.  But it is up to us now to make themost of it, to receive it with gratitude, and to prove ourselves worthy of this gift.
For too long, we were blind to the pain that the Confederate flag stirred in too many of ourcitizens.  It’s true, a flag did not cause these murders.  But as people from all walks of life,Republicans and Democrats, now acknowledge -- including Governor Haley, whose recenteloquence on the subject is worthy of praise -- as we all have to acknowledge, the flag hasalways represented more than just ancestral pride.  For many, black and white, that flag wasa reminder of systemic oppression and racial subjugation.  We see that now.  
Removing the flag from this state’s capitol would not be an act of political correctness; itwould not be an insult to the valor of Confederate soldiers.  It would simply be anacknowledgment that the cause for which they fought -- the cause of slavery -- was wrong --the imposition of Jim Crow after the Civil War, the resistance to civil rights for all people waswrong.  It would be one step in an honest accounting of America’s history; a modest butmeaningful balm for so many unhealed wounds.  It would be an expression of the amazingchanges that have transformed this state and this country for the better, because of the workof so many people of goodwill, people of all races striving to form a more perfect union.  Bytaking down that flag, we express God’s grace.  
But I don't think God wants us to stop there.  For too long, we’ve been blind to the way pastinjustices continue to shape the present.  Perhaps we see that now.  Perhaps this tragedycauses us to ask some tough questions about how we can permit so many of our children tolanguish in poverty, or attend dilapidated schools, or grow up without prospects for a job orfor a career.  
Perhaps it causes us to examine what we’re doing to cause some of our children to hate. Perhaps it softens hearts towards those lost young men, tens and tens of thousands caught upin the criminal justice system -- and leads us to make sure that that system is not infectedwith bias; that we embrace changes in how we train and equip our police so that the bonds oftrust between law enforcement and the communities they serve make us all safer and moresecure.    
Maybe we now realize the way racial bias can infect us even when we don't realize it, so thatwe're guarding against not just racial slurs, but we're also guarding against the subtle impulseto call Johnny back for a job interview but not Jamal.  So that we search our hearts when weconsider laws to make it harder for some of our fellow citizens to vote.  By recognizing ourcommon humanity by treating every child as important, regardless of the color of their skin orthe station into which they were born, and to do what’s necessary to make opportunity realfor every American -- by doing that, we express God’s grace.  
For too long --
Audience:  For too long!
  
President Obama:  For too long, we’ve been blind to the unique mayhem that gun violenceinflicts upon this nation.  Sporadically, our eyes are open:  When eight of our brothers andsisters are cut down in a church basement, 12 in a movie theater, 26 in an elementary school. But I hope we also see the 30 precious lives cut short by gun violence in this country everysingle day; the countless more whose lives are forever changed -- the survivors crippled, thechildren traumatized and fearful every day as they walk to school, the husband who will neverfeel his wife’s warm touch, the entire communities whose grief overflows every time they haveto watch what happened to them happen to some other place.  
The vast majority of Americans -- the majority of gun owners -- want to do something aboutthis.  We see that now.  And I'm convinced that by acknowledging the pain and loss of others,even as we respect the traditions and ways of life that make up this beloved country -- bymaking the moral choice to change, we express God’s grace.  
We don’t earn grace.  We're all sinners.  We don't deserve it.  But God gives it to us anyway. And we choose how to receive it.  It's our decision how to honor it.  
None of us can or should expect a transformation in race relations overnight.  Every timesomething like this happens, somebody says we have to have a conversation about race.  Wetalk a lot about race.  There’s no shortcut.  And we don’t need more talk.  None of us shouldbelieve that a handful of gun safety measures will prevent every tragedy.  It will not.  Peopleof goodwill will continue to debate the merits of various policies, as our democracy requires --this is a big, raucous place, America is.  And there are good people on both sides of thesedebates.  Whatever solutions we find will necessarily be incomplete.
But it would be a betrayal of everything Reverend Pinckney stood for, I believe, if we allowedourselves to slip into a comfortable silence again.  Once the eulogies have been delivered,once the TV cameras move on, to go back to business as usual -- that’s what we so often doto avoid uncomfortable truths about the prejudice that still infects our society.  To settle forsymbolic gestures without following up with the hard work of more lasting change -- that’show we lose our way again.  
It would be a refutation of the forgiveness expressed by those families if we merely slippedinto old habits, whereby those who disagree with us are not merely wrong but bad; where weshout instead of listen; where we barricade ourselves behind preconceived notions or well-
practiced cynicism.
Reverend Pinckney once said, “Across the South, we have a deep appreciation of history -- wehaven’t always had a deep appreciation of each other’s history.”  What is true in the South istrue for America.  Clem understood that justice grows out of recognition of ourselves in eachother.  That my liberty depends on you being free, too.  That history can’t be a sword tojustify injustice, or a shield against progress, but must be a manual for how to avoid repeatingthe mistakes of the past -- how to break the cycle.  A roadway toward a better world.  Heknew that the path of grace involves an open mind -- but, more importantly, an open heart.  
  
That’s what I’ve felt this week -- an open heart.  That, more than any particular policy oranalysis, is what’s called upon right now, I think -- what a friend of mine, the writer MarilynRobinson, calls “that reservoir of goodness, beyond, and of another kind, that we are able todo each other in the ordinary cause of things.”  
That reservoir of goodness.  If we can find that grace, anything is possible.  If we can tap thatgrace, everything can change.  
Amazing grace.  Amazing grace. 
[Begins to sing] -- Amazing grace -- how sweet the sound, that saved a wretch like me; Ionce was lost, but now I’m found; was blind but now I see.  
Clementa Pinckney found that grace.
Cynthia Hurd found that grace.
Susie Jackson found that grace.
Ethel Lance found that grace.
DePayne Middleton-Doctor found that grace.
Tywanza Sanders found that grace.
Daniel L. Simmons, Sr. found that grace.
Sharonda Coleman-Singleton found that grace.
Myra Thompson found that grace.
Through the example of their lives, they’ve now passed it on to us.
May we find ourselves worthy of that precious and extraordinary gift, as long as our livesendure.
May grace now lead them home.
May God continue to shed His grace on the United States of America.
1 Hebrews 11:13
