Good afternoon, everyone.  Let me begin by thanking the Annenberg Foundation Trust, andeveryone here at beauty -- beautiful Sunnylands and the people of Rancho Mirage for theirincredible hospitality these past two days.  I have hosted foreign leaders here before.  It’squite another to host leaders from 10 nations at the same time.  And I want to thankeverybody who helped make the summit such a success.
For 50 years, leaders and people across Southeast Asia have worked together through ASEANto advance their mutual security, prosperity and dignity.  For decades, the United States hasbeen a proud partner with ASEAN.  And this summit has built on the unprecedentedcooperation we’ve forged over the past seven years, as I described yesterday.  This spirit --working together on behalf of mutual interests, in mutual respect -- guided our work over thepast two days.  And so I especially want to thank my fellow leaders from the ASEAN countriesfor being here, for their commitment and for the progress that we’ve made together.
One of my main messages over the past two days has been the commitment of the UnitedStates to ASEAN and its people.  That commitment is and will remain strong and enduring. With our Strategic Partnership, we have a framework to guide our ties for decades to come.
  
Here at Sunnylands, we agreed to a number of key principles, including the principle thatASEAN will continue to be central -- in fact, indispensable -- to peace, prosperity and progressin the Asia Pacific.  When ASEAN speaks with a clear, unified voice, it can help advancesecurity, opportunity and human dignity not only for the more than 600 million people acrossASEAN, but for people across the Asia Pacific and around the world.  And I’m pleased that,here at this summit, ASEAN’s strong voice allowed us to make progress on multiple fronts.
First, we agreed to do more together to encourage the entrepreneurship and innovation thatare at the heart of modern, competitive economies.  We had an excellent discussion with anumber of pioneering business leaders who reiterated the recipe for attracting trade andinvestment -- rule of law, transparency, protection of intellectual property, efficient customs,modern infrastructure, e-commerce and the free flow of information, support for small andmedium-sized businesses, and perhaps most importantly, investment in people -- investmentin strong schools to educate and train the next generation.
Around the table, there was widespread recognition that this is the path ASEAN countries needto continue on.  As they do, it will create even more opportunities for trade and investmentbetween the U.S. and ASEAN countries.
I affirmed our strong support for the ASEAN Community and pledged that the United Stateswill continue to be a partner in ASEAN’s efforts to integrate economies and reduce barriers totrade and investment.  I’m also announcing a new initiative -- U.S.-ASEAN Connect -- anetwork of hubs across the region to better coordinate our economic engagement and connectmore of our entrepreneurs, investors and businesses with each other.
We’re also doing more to help aspiring innovators in the region learn English, the internationallanguage of business.  And I reiterated that the Trans-Pacific Partnership -- which includesfour ASEAN members -- can advance economic integration across ASEAN and set strongerrules for trade throughout the Asia Pacific.  To that end, we’ve launched a new effort to helpall ASEAN countries understand the key elements of TPP, as well as the reforms that couldeventually lead to them joining.
Second, with regard to security, the United States and ASEAN are reaffirming our strongcommitment to a regional order where international rules and norms -- and the rights of allnations, large and small -- are upheld.  We discussed the need for tangible steps in the SouthChina Sea to lower tensions, including a halt to further reclamation, new construction andmilitarization of disputed areas.  Freedom of navigation must be upheld and lawful commerceshould not be impeded.
I reiterated that the United States will continue to fly, sail, and operate wherever internationallaw allows, and we will support the right of all countries to do the same.  We will continue tohelp our allies and partners strengthen their maritime capabilities.
  
And we discussed how any disputes between claimants in the region must be resolvedpeacefully, through legal means, such as the upcoming arbitration ruling under the U.N.Convention of the Law of the Seas, which the parties are obligated to respect and abide by.
Third, I made it clear that the United States will continue to stand with those across SoutheastAsia who are working to advance rule of law, good governance, accountable institutions andthe universal human rights of all people.
We continue to encourage a return to civilian rule in Thailand.  We will sustain ourengagement with the people of Myanmar as a new president is selected, and as they work toimplement the ceasefire agreement and move forward with national reconciliation.
Across the region, we’ll continue to stand with citizens and civil society and defend theirfreedom of speech, of assembly and of the press.  No one, including those in politicalopposition, should ever be detained or imprisoned simply for speaking their mind.  That onlystymies progress, only makes it harder for countries to truly thrive and prosper.
And finally, the United States and ASEAN are doing more to deal with transnational challengestogether.  I offered our assistance to help ASEAN counties better leverage Interpol data toprevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.  We agree that implementing the Paris climatechange agreement, including helping developing countries adapt to and mitigate the impactsof climate change, will be critical and it will enable them to leap ahead to new and affordableclean energy.
As we pursue our sustainable development goals, we’re launching a new competition -- aninnovation challenge to encourage students across ASEAN to develop new solutions to boostagriculture.  We’re moving ahead with our Global Health Security Agenda to prevent futureepidemics, and I pledged additional U.S. assistance to help ASEAN combat the horror ofhuman trafficking.
So, to sum up, I believe this summit has put the U.S.-ASEAN partnership on a new trajectorythat will carry us to even greater heights in the decades ahead.  America’s foreign policyrebalance to the Asia Pacific, including Southeast Asia, will continue to be a foreign policypriority of my presidency.  I look forward to visiting Vietnam for the first time in May and tobecoming the first U.S. President to visit Laos when it hosts the East Asia Summit inSeptember.
And I’m confident that whoever the next President may be will build on the foundation thatwe’ve laid, because there’s strong, sustained, bipartisan support for American engagement inthe Asia Pacific region.  And through our Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative, ourinvestment in young people, in their business success, and civil society and grassroots leadersacross the region I believe will further bind us together in a spirit of partnership and friendshipfor many years to come.
  
So, with that, let me take a few questions.  And I'm going to start with Darlene Superville ofthe Associated Press.  Where is Darlene?  There she is.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  My question is about the Supreme Court.
President Obama:  I'm shocked.
Question:  What recourse do you have if Leader McConnell blocks a vote on your SupremeCourt nominee?  And do you think that if you choose someone moderate enough thatRepublicans might change course and schedule a vote?  And as you consider that choice andwho to nominate, what qualities are important to you, and is diversity among them?  Thankyou.
President Obama:  First of all, I want to reiterate heartfelt condolences to the Scalia family. Obviously, Justice Scalia and I had different political orientations and probably would havedisagreed on the outcome of certain cases.  But there’s no doubt that he was a giant on theSupreme Court, helped to shape the legal landscape.  He was, by all accounts, a good friendand loved his family deeply.  And so it’s important, before we rush into the all the politics ofthis, to take stock of somebody who made enormous contributions to the United States. Andwe are grateful not only for his service but for his family’s service.
The Constitution is pretty clear about what is supposed to happen now.  When there is avacancy on the Supreme Court, the President of the United States is to nominate someone. The Senate is to consider that nomination, and either they disapprove of that nominee or thatnominee is elevated to the Supreme Court.
Historically, this has not been viewed as a question.  There’s no unwritten law that says that itcan only be done on off years -- that’s not in the constitutional text.  I’m amused when I hearpeople who claim to be strict interpreters of the Constitution suddenly reading into it a wholeseries of provisions that are not there.  There is more than enough time for the Senate toconsider in a thoughtful way the record of a nominee that I present and to make a decision.
And with respect to our process, we’re going to do the same thing that we did with respect toJustice Kagan’s nomination and Justice Sotomayor’s nomination.  We’re going to findsomebody who is has an outstanding legal mind, somebody who cares deeply about ourdemocracy and cares about rule of law.  There’s not going to be any particular position on aparticular issue that determines whether or not I nominate them, but I’m going to presentsomebody who indisputably is qualified for the seat and any fair-minded person -- evensomebody who disagreed with my politics -- would say would serve with honor and integrityon the Court.
  
Now, part of the problem that we have here is, is we’ve almost gotten accustomed to howobstructionist the Senate has become when it comes to nominations.  I’ve got 14 nominationsthat have been pending that were unanimously approved by the Judiciary Committee -- soRepublicans and Democrats on the Judiciary Committee all agreed that they were well-
qualified for the position.  And yet we can’t get a vote on those individuals.
So in some ways, this argument is just an extension of what we’ve seen in the Senate,generally -- and not just on judicial nominees.
The basic function of government requires that the President of the United States, in his orher duties, has a team of people -- Cabinet secretaries, assistant secretaries -- that can carryout the basic functions of government.  It requires -- the Constitution requires that we appointjudges so that they can carry out their functions as a separate branch of government.
And the fact that we’ve almost grown accustomed to a situation that is almost unprecedented,where every nomination is contested, everything is blocked regardless of how qualified theperson is, even when there’s no ideological objection to them, certainly where there’s nodisqualifying actions by the nominee that have surfaced -- the fact that it’s that hard, thatwe’re even discussing this, is I think a measure of how, unfortunately, the venom and rancorin Washington has prevented us from getting basic work done.  This would be a good momentfor us to rise above that.
I understand the stakes.  I understand the pressure that Republican senators are,undoubtedly, under.  I mean, the fact of the matter is, is that what the issue here is, is thatthe Court is now divided on many issues; this would be a deciding vote.  And there are a lot ofRepublican senators who are going to be under a lot of pressure from various special interestsand various constituencies and many of their voters to not let any nominee go through, nomatter who I nominate.  But that’s not how the system is supposed to work.  That’s not howour democracy is supposed to work.
And I intend to nominate in due time a very well-qualified candidate.  If we are following basicprecedent, then that nominee will be presented before the committees; the vote will be taken;and ultimately, they’ll be confirmed.  Justice Kennedy, when he was nominated by RonaldReagan -- in Ronald Reagan’s last year in office, a vote was taken, and there were a whole lotof Democrats who I’m sure did not agree with Justice Kennedy on his position on a variety ofissues -- but they did the right thing; they confirmed him.  And if they voted against him, theycertainly didn’t mount a filibuster to block a vote from even coming up.
This is the Supreme Court.  The highest court in the land.  It’s the one court where we wouldexpect elected officials to rise above day-to-day politics.  And this will be the opportunity forsenators to do their job.
  
Your job doesn’t stop until you’re voted out or until your term expires.  I intend to do my jobbetween now and January 20th of 2017.  I expect them to do their job as well.
All right.  Let’s see who we’ve got here.  Jeff Mason.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Following up on that, should we interpret yourcomments just now that you are likely to choose a moderate nominee?  Would you --
President Obama:  No.
Question:  Okay.
President Obama:  I don’t know where you found that.  You shouldn’t assume anythingabout the qualifications of the nominee other than they’re going to be well-qualified.
Question:  All right.
President Obama:  Okay.
Question:  Following up, would you consider a recess appointment if your nominee is notgranted a hearing?
President Obama:  I think that we have more than enough time to go through regular order,regular processes.  I intend to nominate somebody, to present them to the American people,to present them to the Senate.  I expect them to hold hearings.  I expect there to be a vote.
Question:   That means no recess appointment?
President Obama:  Full stop.
Question:  And lastly, as long as we’re doing this in a row, how do you respond to Republicancriticism that your position is undercut by the fact that you and other members of youradministration who were in the Senate at the time tried to filibuster Judge Alito in 2006?
President Obama:  Look, I think what’s fair to say is that how judicial nominations haveevolved over time is not historically the fault of any single party.  This has become just onemore extension of politics.  And there are times where folks are in the Senate and they’rethinking, as I just described, primarily about, is this going to cause me problems in a primary?Is this going to cause me problems with supporters of mine?  And so people take strategicdecisions.  I understand that.
  
But what is also true is Justice Alito is on the bench right now.  I think that, historically, if youlook at it, regardless of what votes particular senators have taken, there’s been a basicconsensus, a basic understanding, that the Supreme Court is different.
And each caucus may decide who’s going to vote where and what but that basically you letthe vote come up, and you make sure that a well-qualified candidate is able to join the bench,even if you don’t particularly agree with them.  And my expectation is, is that the same shouldhappen here.
Now, this will be a test -- one more test -- of whether or not norms, rules, basic fair play canfunction at all in Washington these days.  But I do want to point out, this is not just theSupreme Court.  We have consistently seen just a breakdown in the basic functions ofgovernment because the Senate will not confirm well-qualified nominees even when they’revoted out of committee, which means that they’re voted by both parties without objection.
And we still have problems, because there’s a certain mindset that says we’re just going togrind the system down to a halt, and if we don’t like the President then we’re just not going tolet him make any appointments.  We’re going to make it tougher for the administration to dotheir basic job.  We’re going to make sure that ambassadors aren’t seated, even though theseare critical countries and it may have an effect on our international relations.  We’re going tomake sure that judges aren’t confirmed, despite the fact that Justice Roberts, himself, haspointed out there’s emergencies in courts around the country because there are just notenough judges and there are too many cases, and the system is breaking down.
So this has become a habit.  And it gets worse and worse each year.  And it’s not somethingthat I have spent a huge amount of time talking about, because, frankly, the Americanpeople, on average, they’re more interested in gas prices and wages and issues that touch ontheir day-to-day lives in a more direct way, so it doesn’t get a lot of political attention.
But this is the Supreme Court.  And it’s going to get some attention.  And we have to askourselves as a society a fundamental question:  Are we able to still make this democracy workthe way it’s supposed to, the way our Founders envisioned it?  And I would challenge anyonewho purports to be adhering to the original intent of the Founders, anybody who believes inthe Constitution, coming up with a plausible rationale as to why they would not even have ahearing for a nominee made in accordance with the Constitution by the President of the UnitedStates --with a year left, practically, in office.  It’s pretty hard to find that in the Constitution.
All right.  You’ve gotten at least -- you’ve gotten four now, Jeff.
Toluse.
  
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Two different topics -- first on Syria.  Last year, whenPresident Putin was about to enter into Syria, you said that he was doing so from a position ofweakness and that he would only get himself involved in a quagmire there.  Now, with Aleppoabout to fall, it seems like President Putin is basically getting one of his goals, which is tobolster Assad and to take out the rebels, which the U.S. is backing.  How do you respond tocritics who say that you have been outfoxed by Putin?  And what is your plan if Aleppo doesfall?  Do you plan to step up military action to help the rebels in Syria, who you have said arekey to taking on ISIS?
And then secondly, I wanted to ask you about 2016 as well.
President Obama:  Okay, this is getting to be a lot of questions here.  How about -- youasked me a big question right there.  How about I just answer that one?
Question:  Okay, sure.
President Obama:  All right.
First of all, if you look back at the transcripts, what I said was that Russia has been proppingup Assad this entire time. The fact that Putin finally had to send his own troops and his ownaircraft and invest this massive military operation was not a testament to a great strength; itwas a testament to the weakness of Assad’s position.  That if somebody is strong, then youdon’t have to send in your army to prop up your ally.  They have legitimacy in their countryand they are able to manage it their self, and then you have good relations with them.  Yousend in your army when the horse you’re backing isn’t effective.  And that’s exactly what’shappened.
Now, what I said was, is that Russia would involve itself in a quagmire.  Absolutely, it will.  Ifthere’s anybody who thinks that somehow the fighting ends because Russia and the regimehas made some initial advances -- about three-quarters of the country is still under control offolks other than Assad.  That’s not stopping anytime soon.
I say that, by the way, with no pleasure.  This is not a contest between me and Putin.  Thequestion is, how can we stop the suffering, stabilize the region, stop this massive out-
migration of refugees who are having such a terrible time, end the violence, stop the bombingof schools and hospitals and innocent civilians, stop creating a safe haven for ISIS.  Andthere’s nothing that’s happened over the last several weeks that points to those issues beingsolved.  And that is what I mean by a quagmire.
Now, Putin may think that he’s prepared to invest in a permanent occupation of Syria withRussian military.  That’s going to be pretty costly.  That’s going to be a big piece of business. And if you look at the state of the Russian economy, that’s probably not the best thing forRussia.
  
What would be smarter would be for Russia to work with the United States and other partiesin the international community to try to broker some sort of political transition.  Now, JohnKerry, working with his Russian counterpart, has, on paper, said that there’s going to be acessation of hostilities in a few days.  This will test whether or not that’s possible.  It’s hard todo because there’s been a lot of bloodshed.  And if Russia continues indiscriminate bombing ofthe sort that we’ve been seeing, I think it’s fair to say that you’re not going to see any take-
up by the opposition.
And, yes, Russia has a major military.  Obviously, a bunch of rebels are not going to be ableto compete with the hardware of the second-most powerful military in the world.  But thatdoesn’t solve the problem of actually stabilizing Syria.  And the only way to do that is to bringabout some sort of political transition.
We will see what happens over the next several days.  And we will continue to work with ourpartners who are focused on defeating ISIS to also see how we can work together to try tobring about a more lasting political solution than aerial bombardment of schools and hospitalsare going to achieve.
But it’s hard.  I’m under no illusions here that this is going to be easy.  A country has beenshattered because Assad was willing to shatter it, and has repeatedly missed opportunities totry to arrive at a political transition.  And Russia has been party to that entire process.  Andthe real question we should be asking is what is it that Russia thinks it gains if it gets acountry that’s been completely destroyed as an ally that it now has to perpetually spendbillions of dollars to prop up?  That’s not that great a prize.  Unfortunately, the problem is, isthat it has spillover effects that are impacting everybody, and that’s what we have to focuson.
One thing that I do want to add, though -- this has not distracted us from continuing to focuson ISIL.  And we continue to press them hard both in Iraq and Syria.  That will not stop.  Andif we can get a political transition in Syria, that allows us to coordinate more effectively withnot just Russia, but other countries in the region to focus on the folks who pose the greatestdirect threat to the United States.
All right.  Andrew Beatty.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I wanted to ask you, first of all, whether you think thatmilitary intervention will be necessary in Libya to dislodge the Islamic State from Sirte?  Andas an extension of that, do you think that by the end of your presidency the Islamic State willstill have geographical strongholds throughout the Middle East?  And, I'm sorry, I can't resistasking a third -- how was the stadium course?  What did you shoot?
President Obama:  The last, for non-golfers, is a reference to PGA West.  Very nice course;very difficult.  My score is classified.
  
With respect to Libya, I have been clear from the outset that we will go after ISIS wherever itappears, the same way that we went after al Qaeda wherever they appeared.  And thetestament to the fact that we are doing that already is that we took out ISIS -- one of ISIS’smost prominent leaders in Libya.
We will continue to take actions where we've got a clear operation and a clear target in mind. And we are working with our other coalition partners to make sure that as we seeopportunities to prevent ISIS from digging in, in Libya, we take them.  At the same time,we're working diligently with the United Nations to try to get a government in place in Libya. And that's been a problem.
The tragedy of Libya over the last several years is Libya has a relatively small population anda lot of oil wealth and could be really successful.  They are divided by tribal lines and ethniclines, power plays.  There is now, I think, a recognition on the part of a broad middle amongtheir political leadership that it makes sense to unify so that there is just some semblance of astate there, but extremes on either side are still making it difficult for that state to cohere.
If we can get that done, that will be enormously helpful, because our strong preference, ashas always been the case, is to train Libyans to fight.  And the good news in Libya is, is thatthey don't like outsiders coming in, telling them what to do.  There’s a whole bunch ofconstituencies who are hardened fighters and don't ascribe to ISIS or their pervertedideology.  But they have to be organized and can't be fighting each other.  And so that'sprobably as important as anything that we're going to be doing in Libya over the comingmonths.
Carol Lee.
Question:   Thank you, Mr. President.  The Democratic race to replace you has gotten prettyheated lately, and you have Hillary Clinton saying that -- or at least casting herself as therightful heir to your legacy and the one, the candidate who will be the keeper of your legacy,while also saying the Bernie Sanders has been disloyal to you.  Is she right?
President Obama:  Well, that's the great thing about primaries, is everybody is trying todifferentiate themselves, when, in fact, Bernie and Hillary agree on a lot of stuff and disagreepretty much across the board with everything the Republicans stand for.  So my hope is, isthat we can let the primary voters and caucus-goers have their say for a while, and let’s seehow this thing plays itself out.
I know Hillary better than I know Bernie because she served in my administration and shewas an outstanding Secretary of State.  And I suspect that on certain issues she agrees withme more than Bernie does.  On the other hand, there may be a couple issues where Bernieagrees with me more.  I don't know.  I haven’t studied their positions that closely.
  
Here’s what I have confidence in -- that Democratic voters believe in certain principles.  Theybelieve in equal opportunity.  They believe in making sure that every kid in this country gets afair shot.  They believe in making sure that economic growth is broad-based and everybodybenefits from it, and if you work hard you're not in poverty.  They believe in preserving astrong safety net through programs like Social Security and Medicare.  They believe in aforeign policy that is not reckless, that is tough and protects the American people but doesn’tshoot before it aims.  They believe in climate change.  They think science matters.  They thinkthat it's important for us to have some basic regulations to keep our air clean and our waterclean, and to make sure that banks aren't engaging in excesses that can result in the kind ofthing that we saw in 2007 and 2008.  So there’s a broad convergence of interests aroundthose issues.
I think what you're seeing among Democrats right now is a difference in tactics, trying tofigure out how do you actually get things done; how do you actually operate in a politicalenvironment that's become so polarized; how do you deal with the power of special interests,and frankly, how do you deal with a Republican Party right now that has moved so far to theright that it's often hard to find common ground.
And so that's, I think, the debate that's taking place right now.  It's a healthy debate. Ultimately, I will probably have an opinion on it, based on both being a candidate of hope andchange and a President who’s got some nicks and cuts and bruises from getting stuff doneover the last seven years.  But for now, I think it's important for Democratic voters to expressthemselves and for the candidates to be run through the paces.
The thing I can say unequivocally, Carol is I'm not unhappy that I am not on the ballot.
Ron Allen, NBC.
Question:   Let me continue the 2016 questions.  On the Republican side -- and a lot of yourguests were probably very intrigued by the fact that there’s a candidate who’s still winningwho’s called for a ban on Muslims, and significant segments of the population in Americaagree --
President Obama:  “Intrigued” is an interesting way of putting it.
Question:   Struck -- well, what was their reaction?  That's one of my five questions.  But thepoint is --
President Obama:  Ron, let’s stick to two.
  
Question:  The point is, in the past you've explained that as anger, resentment, insecurity --economic insecurity.  The question is how much responsibility do you accept for that reservoirof feeling in the country that's propelling that sort of candidate?  And a couple weeks ago, youtold Matt Lauer that Donald Trump would not win the presidency.  Do you now think that hewill not win the nomination, as well?  And what about Rubio, and what about Cruz?
President Obama:  I think foreign observers are troubled by some of the rhetoric that's beentaking place in these Republican primaries and Republican debates.  I don't think it’srestricted, by the way, to Mr. Trump.  I find it interesting that everybody is focused on Trump,primarily just because he says in more interesting ways what the other candidates are saying,as well.
So he may up the ante in anti-Muslim sentiment, but if you look at what the other Republicancandidates have said, that's pretty troubling, too.  He may express strong, anti-immigrationsentiment, but you've heard that from the other candidates, as well.  You've got a candidatewho sponsored a bill -- that I supported -- to finally solve the immigration problem, and he’srunning away from it as fast as he can.
They're all denying climate change.  I think that's troubling to the international community,since the science is unequivocal.  And the other countries around the world, they kind of counton the United States being on the side of science and reason and common sense, becausethey know that if the United States does not act on big problems in smart ways, nobody will.
But this is not just Mr. Trump.  Look at the statements that are being made by the othercandidates.  There is not a single candidate in the Republican primary that thinks we shoulddo anything about climate change; that thinks it’s serious.  Well, that's a problem.  The rest ofthe world looks at that and says, how can that be?
I’ll leave it to you to speculate on how this whole race is going to go.  I continue to believe Mr.Trump will not be President.  And the reason is because I have a lot of faith in the Americanpeople, and I think they recognize that being President is a serious job.  It’s not hosting a talkshow or a reality show.  It’s not promotion.  It’s not marketing.
It’s hard.  And a lot of people count on us getting it right.  And it’s not a matter of panderingand doing whatever will get you in the news on a given day.  And sometimes it requires youmaking hard decisions even when people don't like it, and doing things that are unpopular,and standing up for people who are vulnerable but don't have some powerful politicalconstituency.  And it requires being able to work with leaders around the world in a way thatreflects the importance of the office; and gives people confidence that you know the facts, andyou know their names, and you know where they are on a map, and you know somethingabout their history.  And you're not just going to play to the crowd back home -- because theyhave their own crowds back home -- and you're trying to solve problems.
  
And so, yes, during primaries, people vent and they express themselves.  And it seems likeentertainment, and oftentimes it’s reported just like entertainment.  But as you get closer,reality has a way of intruding.
And these are the folks who I have faith in, because they ultimately are going to say whoeveris standing where I’m standing right now has the nuclear codes with them, and can order 21-
year-olds into a firefight, and have to make sure that the banking system doesn't collapse,and is often responsible for not just the United States of America but 20 other countries thatare having big problems or falling apart and are going to be looking for us to do something. And the American people are pretty sensible and I think they’ll make a sensible choice in theend.
All right?  Thanks, everybody. Thank you.
