Thank you so much.  Thank you, everybody.  Thank you.  Well, good morning, everybody!
Audience: Good morning!
President Obama:  A slightly early Shabbat Shalom.  I want to thank Rabbi Steinlauf for thevery kind introduction.  And to all the members of the congregation, thank you so much forsuch an extraordinary and warm welcome.
I want to thank a couple of outstanding members of Congress who are here.  Senator MichaelBennet -- where did Michael Bennet go?  There he is. And Representative Sandy Levin, who ishere.  I want to thank our special envoy to combat anti-Semitism, Ira Forman, for hisimportant work.  There he is.  But as I said, most of all I want to thank the entirecongregation of Adas Israel for having me here today.
Earlier this week, I was actually interviewed by one of your members, Jeff Goldberg.  And Jeffreminded me that he once called me “the first Jewish President.”   Now, since some peoplestill seem to be wondering about my faith -- I should make clear this was an honorary title. But I was flattered.
  
And as an honorary member of the tribe, not to mention somebody who’s hosted seven WhiteHouse Seders and been advised by -- and been advised by two Jewish chiefs of staff, I canalso proudly say that I’m getting a little bit of the hang of the lingo.   But I will not use any ofthe Yiddish-isms that Rahm Emanuel taught me because -- I want to be invited back.  Let’sjust say he had some creative new synonyms for “Shalom.”
Now, I wanted to come here to celebrate Jewish American Heritage Month because thiscongregation, like so many around the country, helps us to tell the American story.  And backin 1876, when President Grant helped dedicate Adas Israel, he became the first sittingPresident in history to attend a synagogue service.  And at the time, it was an extraordinarilysymbolic gesture -- not just for America, but for the world.
And think about the landscape of Jewish history.  Tomorrow night, the holiday of Shavuotmarks the moment that Moses received the Torah at Mount Sinai, the first link in a chain oftradition that stretches back thousands of years, and a foundation stone for our civilization. Yet for most of those years, Jews were persecuted -- not embraced -- by those in power. Many of your ancestors came here fleeing that persecution. The United States could have been merely another destination in that ongoing Diaspora.  Butthose who came here found that America was more than just a country.  America was anidea.  America stood for something.  As George Washington wrote to the Jews of Newport,Rhode Island:  The United States “gives to bigotry no sanction, to persecution no assistance.”
It’s important for us to acknowledge that too often in our history we fell short of those loftyideals -- in the legal subjugation of African Americans, through slavery and Jim Crow; thetreatment of Native Americans.  And far too often, American Jews faced the scourge of anti-
Semitism here at home.  But our founding documents gave us a North Star, our Bill of Rights;our system of government gave us a capacity for change.  And where other nations activelyand legally might persecute or discriminate against those of different faiths, this nation wascalled upon to see all of us as equal before the eyes of the law.  When other countries treatedtheir own citizens as “wretched refuse,” we lifted up our lamp beside the golden door andwelcomed them in.  Our country is immeasurably stronger because we did.
From Einstein to Brandeis, from Jonas Salk to Betty Friedan, American Jews have madecontributions to this country that have shaped it in every aspect.  And as a community,American Jews have helped make our union more perfect.  The story of Exodus inspiredoppressed people around the world in their own struggles for civil rights.  From the foundingmembers of the NAACP to a freedom summer in Mississippi, from women’s rights to gay rightsto workers' rights, Jews took the heart of Biblical edict that we must not oppress a stranger,having been strangers once ourselves.
Earlier this year, when we marked the 50th anniversary of the march in Selma, weremembered the iconic images of Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel marching with Dr. King,praying with his feet.
  
To some, it must have seemed strange that a rabbi from Warsaw would take such great risksto stand with a Baptist preacher from Atlanta.  But Heschel explained that their cause was oneand the same.  In his essay, “No Religion is an Island,” he wrote, “We must choose betweeninterfaith and inter-nihilism.”  Between a shared hope that says together we can shape abrighter future, or a shared cynicism that says our world is simply beyond repair.
So the heritage we celebrate this month is a testament to the power of hope.  Me standinghere before you, all of you in this incredible congregation is a testament to the power ofhope.  It’s a rebuke to cynicism.  It’s a rebuke to nihilism.  And it inspires us to have faith thatour future, like our past, will be shaped by the values that we share.  At home, those valuescompel us to work to keep alive the American Dream of opportunity for all.  It means that wecare about issues that affect all children, not just our own; that we’re prepared to invest inearly childhood education; that we are concerned about making college affordable; that wewant to create communities where if you’re willing to work hard, you can get ahead the wayso many who fled and arrived on these shores were able to get ahead.  Around the world,those values compel us to redouble our efforts to protect our planet and to protect the humanrights of all who share this planet.
It’s particularly important to remember now, given the tumult that is taking place in so manycorners of the globe, in one of the world’s most dangerous neighborhoods, those sharedvalues compel us to reaffirm that our enduring friendship with the people of Israel and ourunbreakable bonds with the state of Israel -- that those bonds, that friendship cannot bebroken.  Those values compel us to say that our commitment to Israel’s security -- and mycommitment to Israel’s security -- is and always will be unshakeable.
And I’ve said this before:  It would be a moral failing on the part of the U.S. government andthe American people, it would be a moral failing on my part if we did not stand up firmly,steadfastly not just on behalf of Israel’s right to exist, but its right to thrive and prosper.   Because it would ignore the history that brought the state of Israel about.  It would ignore thestruggle that’s taken place through millennia to try to affirm the kinds of values that sayeverybody has a place, everybody has rights, everybody is a child of God.
As many of you know, I’ve visited the houses hit by rocket fire in Sderot.  I’ve been to YadVashem and made that solemn vow:  “Never forget.  Never again.”  When someone threatensIsrael’s citizens or its very right to exist, Israelis necessarily that seriously.  And so do I. Today, the military and intelligence cooperation between our two countries is stronger thanever.  Our support of the Iron Dome’s rocket system has saved Israeli lives.  And I can saythat no U.S. President, no administration has done more to ensure that Israel can protectitself than this one.
As part of that commitment, there’s something else that the United States and Israel agreeson:  Iran must not, under any circumstances, be allowed to get a nuclear weapon.  Now,there’s a debate about how to achieve that -- and that's a healthy debate.
  
I’m not going to use my remaining time to go too deep into policy -- although for those of youwho are interested -- we have a lot of material out there.   But I do want everybody to justremember a few key things.
The deal that we already reached with Iran has already halted or rolled back parts of Iran’snuclear program.  Now we’re seeking a comprehensive solution.  I will not accept a bad deal. As I pointed out in my most recent article with Jeff Goldberg, this deal will have my name onit, so nobody has a bigger personal stake in making sure that it delivers on its promise.  Iwant a good deal.
I'm interested in a deal that blocks every single one of Iran’s pathways to a nuclear weapon --every single path.  A deal that imposes unprecedented inspections on all elements of Iran’snuclear program, so that they can’t cheat; and if they try to cheat, we will immediately knowabout it and sanctions snap back on.  A deal that endures beyond a decade; that addressesthis challenge for the long term.  In other words, a deal that makes the world and the region -
- including Israel -- more secure.  That’s how I define a good deal.
I can’t stand here today and guarantee an agreement will be reached.  We’re hopeful.  We’reworking hard.  But nothing is agreed until everything is agreed.  And I’ve made clear thatwhen it comes to preventing Iran from getting a nuclear weapon, all options are and willremain on the table.
Moreover, even if we do get a good deal, there remains the broader issue of Iran’s support forterrorism and regional destabilization, and ugly threats against Israel.  And that’s why ourstrategic partnership with Israel will remain, no matter what happens in the days and yearsahead.  And that’s why the people of Israel must always know America has its back, andAmerica will always have its back. Now, that does not mean that there will not be, or should not be, periodic disagreementsbetween our two governments.  There will be disagreements on tactics when it comes to howto prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon, and that is entirely appropriate and should befully aired.  Because the stakes are sufficiently high that anything that's proposed has to besubjected to scrutiny -- and I welcome that scrutiny.
But there are also going to be some disagreements rooted in shared history that go beyondtactics, that are rooted in how we might remain true to our shared values.  I came to knowIsrael as a young man through these incredible images of kibbutzim, and Moshe Dayan, andGolda Meir, and Israel overcoming incredible odds in the ’67 war.  The notion of pioneers whoset out not only to safeguard a nation, but to remake the world.  Not only to make the desertbloom, but to allow their values to flourish; to ensure that the best of Judaism would thrive. And those values in many ways came to be my own values.  They believed the story of theirpeople gave them a unique perspective among the nations of the world, a unique moralauthority and responsibility that comes from having once been a stranger yourself.
  
And to a young man like me, grappling with his own identity, recognizing the scars of racehere in this nation, inspired by the civil rights struggle, the idea that you could be grounded inyour history, as Israel was, but not be trapped by it, to be able to repair the world -- that ideawas liberating.  The example of Israel and its values was inspiring.
So when I hear some people say that disagreements over policy belie a general lack ofsupport of Israel, I must object, and I object forcefully.    For us to paper over difficultquestions, particularly about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or about settlement policy, that’snot a true measure of friendship.
Before I came out here, the Rabbi showed me the room that’s been built to promotescholarship and dialogue, and to be able to find how we make our shared values live.  And thereason you have that room is because applying those values to our lives is often hard, and itinvolves difficult choices.  That’s why we study.  That’s why it’s not just a formula.  And that’swhat we have to do as nations as well as individuals.  We have to grapple and struggle withhow do we apply the values that we care about to this very challenging and dangerous world.
And it is precisely because I care so deeply about the state of Israel -- it’s precisely because,yes, I have high expectations for Israel the same way I have high expectations for the UnitedStates of America -- that I feel a responsibility to speak out honestly about what I think willlead to long-term security and to the preservation of a true democracy in the Jewishhomeland.  And I believe that’s two states for two peoples, Israel and Palestine, living side byside in peace and security.  Just as Israelis built a state in their homeland, Palestinians have aright to be a free people on their land, as well.
Now, I want to emphasize -- that’s not easy.  The Palestinians are not the easiest ofpartners.   The neighborhood is dangerous.  And we cannot expect Israel to take existentialrisks with their security so that any deal that takes place has to take into account the genuinedangers of terrorism and hostility.
But it is worthwhile for us to keep up the prospect, the possibility of bridging divides andbeing just, and looking squarely at what’s possible but also necessary in order for Israel to bethe type of nation that it was intended to be in its earliest founding.
And that same sense of shared values also compel me to speak out -- compel all of us tospeak out -- against the scourge of anti-Semitism wherever it exists.   I want to be clear that,to me, all these things are connected.  The rights I insist upon and now fight for, for all peoplehere in the United States compels me then to stand up for Israel and look out for the rights ofthe Jewish people.  And the rights of the Jewish people then compel me to think about aPalestinian child in Ramallah that feels trapped without opportunity.  That’s what Jewishvalues teach me.  That’s what the Judeo-Christian tradition teaches me.  These things areconnected.
  
And in recent years, we’ve seen a deeply disturbing rise in anti-Semitism in parts of the worldwhere it would have seemed unthinkable just a few years or decades ago.  This is not somepassing fad; these aren’t just isolated phenomenon.  And we know from our history theycannot be ignored.  Anti-Semitism is, and always will be, a threat to broader human values towhich we all must aspire.  And when we allow anti-Semitism to take root, then our souls aredestroyed, and it will spread.
And that’s why, tonight, for the first time ever, congregations around the world arecelebrating a Solidarity Shabbat.  It’s a chance for leaders to publicly stand against anti-
Semitism and bigotry in all of its forms.  And I’m proud to be a part of this movement, andI’m proud that six ambassadors from Europe are joining us today.  And their presence here --our presence together -- is a reminder that we are not doomed to repeat the mistakes of thepast.  Our traditions, our history, can help us chart a better course as long as we are mindfulof that history and those traditions, and we are vigilant in speaking out and standing upagainst what is wrong.  It’s not always easy, I think, to speak out against what is wrong, evenfor good people.
So I want to close with the story of one more of the many rabbis who came to Selma 50 yearsago.  A few days after David Teitelbaum arrived to join the protests, he and a colleague werethrown in jail.  And they spent a Friday night in custody, singing Adon Olam to the tune of“We Shall Overcome.”  And that in and of itself is a profound statement of faith and hope.  Butwhat’s wonderful is, is that out of respect many of their fellow protestors began wearing whatthey called “freedom caps” -- yarmulkes -- as they marched.
And the day after they were released from prison, Rabbi Teitelbaum watched Dr. King lead aprayer meeting before crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge.  And Dr. King said, “We are likethe children of Israel, marching from slavery to freedom.”
That’s what happens when we’re true to our values.  It’s not just good for us, but it brings thecommunity together.  Tikkun Olam -- it brings the community together and it helps repair theworld.  It bridges differences that once looked unbridgeable.  It creates a future for ourchildren that once seemed unattainable.  This congregation -- Jewish American life is atestimony to the capacity to make our values live.  But it requires courage.  It requiresstrength.  It requires that we speak the truth not just when it’s easy, but when it’s hard.
So may we always remember that our shared heritage makes us stronger, that our roots areintertwined.  May we always choose faith over nihilism, and courage over despair, and hopeover cynicism and fear.  As we walk our own leg of a timeless, sacred march, may we alwaysstand together, here at home and around the world.
Thank you.  God bless you.
God bless the United States of America. Thank you.
