Good evening.  Today, the United States -- together with our close allies and partners -- tookan important first step toward a comprehensive solution that addresses our concerns with theIslamic Republic of Iran’s nuclear program.
Since I took office, I’ve made clear my determination to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclearweapon.  As I’ve said many times, my strong preference is to resolve this issue peacefully,and we’ve extended the hand of diplomacy.  Yet for many years, Iran has been unwilling tomeet its obligations to the international community.  So my administration worked withCongress, the United Nations Security Council and countries around the world to imposeunprecedented sanctions on the Iranian government.
These sanctions have had a substantial impact on the Iranian economy, and with the electionof a new Iranian President earlier this year, an opening for diplomacy emerged.  I spokepersonally with President Rouhani of Iran earlier this fall.  Secretary Kerry has met multipletimes with Iran’s Foreign Minister.  And we have pursued intensive diplomacy -- bilaterallywith the Iranians, and together with our P5-plus-1 partners -- the United Kingdom, France,Germany, Russia, and China, as well as the European Union.
Today, that diplomacy opened up a new path toward a world that is more secure -- a future inwhich we can verify that Iran’s nuclear program is peaceful and that it cannot build a nuclearweapon.
  
While today’s announcement is just a first step, it achieves a great deal.  For the first time innearly a decade, we have halted the progress of the Iranian nuclear program, and key parts ofthe program will be rolled back.  Iran has committed to halting certain levels of enrichmentand neutralizing part of its stockpiles.  Iran cannot use its next-generation centrifuges, whichare used for enriching uranium.  Iran cannot install or start up new centrifuges, and itsproduction of centrifuges will be limited.  Iran will halt work at its plutonium reactor.  And newinspections will provide extensive access to Iran’s nuclear facilities and allow the internationalcommunity to verify whether Iran is keeping its commitments.
These are substantial limitations which will help prevent Iran from building a nuclear weapon. Simply put, they cut off Iran’s most likely paths to a bomb.  Meanwhile, this first step willcreate time and space over the next six months for more negotiations to fully address ourcomprehensive concerns about the Iranian program.  And because of this agreement, Irancannot use negotiations as cover to advance its program.
On our side, the United States and our friends and allies have agreed to provide Iran withmodest relief, while continuing to apply our toughest sanctions.  We will refrain from imposingnew sanctions, and we will allow the Iranian government access to a portion of the revenuethat they have been denied through sanctions.  But the broader architecture of sanctions willremain in place and we will continue to enforce them vigorously.  And if Iran does not fullymeet its commitments during this six-month phase, we will turn off the relief and ratchet upthe pressure.
Over the next six months, we will work to negotiate a comprehensive solution.  We approachthese negotiations with a basic understanding:  Iran, like any nation, should be able to accesspeaceful nuclear energy.  But because of its record of violating its obligations, Iran mustaccept strict limitations on its nuclear program that make it impossible to develop a nuclearweapon.
In these negotiations, nothing will be agreed to unless everything is agreed to.  The burden ison Iran to prove to the world that its nuclear program will be exclusively for peacefulpurposes.
If Iran seizes this opportunity, the Iranian people will benefit from rejoining the internationalcommunity, and we can begin to chip away at the mistrust between our two nations.  Thiswould provide Iran with a dignified path to forge a new beginning with the wider world basedon mutual respect.  If, on the other hand, Iran refuses, it will face growing pressure andisolation.
Over the last few years, Congress has been a key partner in imposing sanctions on the Iraniangovernment, and that bipartisan effort made possible the progress that was achieved today. Going forward, we will continue to work closely with Congress.
  
However, now is not the time to move forward on new sanctions -– because doing so wouldderail this promising first step, alienate us from our allies and risk unraveling the coalition thatenabled our sanctions to be enforced in the first place.
That international unity is on display today.  The world is united in support of ourdetermination to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.  Iran must know thatsecurity and prosperity will never come through the pursuit of nuclear weapons -- it must bereached through fully verifiable agreements that make Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weaponsimpossible.
As we go forward, the resolve of the United States will remain firm, as will our commitmentsto our friends and allies –- particularly Israel and our Gulf partners, who have good reason tobe skeptical about Iran’s intentions.
Ultimately, only diplomacy can bring about a durable solution to the challenge posed by Iran’snuclear program.  As President and Commander-in-Chief, I will do what is necessary toprevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.  But I have a profound responsibility to try toresolve our differences peacefully, rather than rush towards conflict.  Today, we have a realopportunity to achieve a comprehensive, peaceful settlement, and I believe we must test it.
The first step that we’ve taken today marks the most significant and tangible progress thatwe’ve made with Iran since I took office.  And now we must use the months ahead to pursuea lasting and comprehensive settlement that would resolve an issue that has threatened oursecurity -- and the security of our allies -- for decades.  It won’t be easy, and huge challengesremain ahead.  But through strong and principled diplomacy, the United States of America willdo our part on behalf of a world of greater peace, security, and cooperation among nations.
