 President Aquino:  The honorable President of the United States Barack Obamaand his official delegation, members of the Cabinet present, members of the press, ladies andgentlemen: good afternoon.
Today, the Philippines welcomes President Obama and his delegation on his first state visit tothe Philippines. The United States is a key ally, a strategic partner, and a reliable friend of thePhilippines.
With this visit, we reaffirm the deep partnership between our countries, one founded ondemocratic values, mutual interest in our shared history and aspirations, and one that willdefinitely give us the momentum to propel our peoples to even greater heights.
We witnessed the most recent and tangible manifestations of this in the immediate outpouringof assistance from the government of the United States and the American people in theaftermath of Typhoon Haiyan (or Yolanda), and your nation’s clear expression of solidaritywith the typhoon survivors.
Mr. President, in your State of the Union address earlier this year, you spoke of how Americanvolunteers and troops were greeted with gratitude in the affected areas.  Today, I reiterateformally the Filipino people will never forget such kindness and compassion.
  
On behalf of my countrymen, I thank the United States of America once more for being a truefriend to our people.
The friendship and partnership between our countries, however, are evident not only in timesof crisis and immediate need, but also in other aspects of our relations.  Our defense alliancehas been a cornerstone of peace and stability in the Asia Pacific region for more than 60years.  And our strategic partnership spans a broad range of areas of cooperation,contributing to the growth and prosperity of both our nations, and fostering closer bondsbetween our peoples.
As such, President Obama and I met today with the shared resolve to ensure that ourdeepening relations are attune to the realities and needs that have emerged in the 21stcentury, which affect not only our two countries, but also the entire community of nations.
I thank President Obama for the U.S.’s support for our government’s efforts in modernizingand enhancing its defense capabilities.  The Philippines-U.S. Enhanced Defense CooperationAgreement takes our security cooperation to a higher level of engagement, reaffirms ourcountry’s commitment to mutual defense and security, and promotes regional peace andstability.
Both President Obama and I shared the conviction that territorial and maritime disputes in theAsia Pacific region should be settled peacefully based on international law.  We affirm thatarbitration is an open, friendly and peaceful approach to seeking a just and durable solution. We also underscored the importance of the full and effective implementation of theDeclaration of Conduct and the expeditious conclusion of a substantive and legally bindingCode of Conduct in the South China Sea -- all towards fostering peace and stability in our partof the world.
We, likewise, welcome the active participation of the United States in regional mechanismssuch as the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit. 
Typhoon Haiyan showed the entire world how vulnerable the Philippines as well as otherdeveloping countries are to natural disasters.  As such, humanitarian assistance and disasterresponse is an essential component of our cooperation.  As the United States and theAmerican people have always been ready to support us in the aftermath of disasters, so toodo we look forward to the continued cooperation of the United States and the rest of ourpartners in the international community as we undertake the task of building back thecommunities affected by Typhoon Haiyan.
This morning we made a promising start as we discussed how our partnership can beenhanced through building climate resilient communities.  These kind of strong communitiesare important not only in withstanding disasters, but also in fostering inclusive growth acrossthe entire country.
  
President Obama and I recognize the importance of strong economic engagement for thecontinued growth of both the Philippines and the United States.
On this note, we expressed our appreciation for the U.S.’s support for our government’sprograms under the Partnership for Growth framework, which enhances the policyenvironment for economic growth through US $145 million total plan contribution from theUSAID.  U.S. support is also coursed through the Millennium Challenge Corporation, whichsupports the implementation of projects and road infrastructure, poverty reduction, and goodgovernance, with $434 million grant from 2011 to 2016.
Recently, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration reinstated the Philippines to a Category 1status.  This will redound to mutual benefit for our countries from opening more routes fortravel between the United States and the Philippines to creating more business opportunitiesto facilitate the increased tourism and business travel.
We welcome the substantive agreement between our countries on the terms and concessionsfor the U.S. to support the Philippines’ request for the extension of special treatment for riceimports until 2017. 
We also discussed the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is a high-standard trade agreementthat will shape the global and regional economic architecture in the 21st century.  ThePhilippines is working to assert in how participation in TPP can be realized. 
The signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro last March 27 brings a justand lasting peace within our reach  -- a peace that will serve as a strong foundation forstability, inclusivity, and progress in Mindanao.  This was born of the steadfast commitmentand the hard work of our administration, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, and other partnersand stakeholders, the U.S. included.
We thank President Obama for the United States’ significant assistance and support for thePhilippine peace process.  Our meeting today was comprehensive, historic and significant,embodying our shared values and aspirations.  It afforded President Obama and myself theopportunity to build on the relations between our countries, and discuss our strategic missionfor the future of the Philippines-United States relationship -- a relationship that is modern,mature and forward-looking, and one that allows us to surpass challenges towards the benefitof our peoples, the entire region and the world.
Thank you.
 
  
welcome and your very kind words. 
 President Obama:  Mabuhay.  Thank you, President Aquino, for your warm
With the President’s indulgence, I want to begin by saying a few words about some terriblestorms and tornadoes back home in the United States.  Over the weekend, a series of stormsclaimed at least a dozen lives and damaged or destroyed homes and businesses andcommunities across multiple states, with the worst toll in Arkansas.  So I want to offer mydeepest condolences to all those who lost loved ones.  I commend the heroic efforts of firstresponders and neighbors who rushed to help.
I want everyone affected by this tragedy to know that FEMA and the federal government is onthe ground and will help our fellow Americans in need, working with state and local officials. And I want everybody to know that your country will be there to help you recover and rebuildas long as it takes.
Now, this is my first visit to the Philippines as President, and I’m proud to be here as we markthe 70th anniversary of the Battle of Leyte Gulf, when Americans and Filipinos fought togetherto liberate this nation during World War II.  All these years later, we continue to standshoulder-to-shoulder to uphold peace and security in this region and around the world. 
So, Benigno, I want to thank you and the Filipino people not only for your generous hospitalitytoday, but for a friendship that has spanned generations.  And I’d add that our friendship isdeeper and the United States is stronger because of the contributions and patriotism ofmillions of proud Filipino-Americans.
As I’ve made clear throughout this trip, the United States is renewing our leadership in theAsia Pacific, and our engagement is rooted in our alliances.  And that includes the Philippines,which is the oldest security treaty alliance that we have in Asia.  As a vibrant democracy, thePhilippines reflects the desire of citizens in this region to live in freedom and to have theiruniversal rights upheld.  As one of the fastest-growing economies in Asia, the Philippinesrepresents new opportunities for the trade and investment that creates jobs in bothcountries. 
And given its strategic location, the Philippines is a vital partner on issues such as maritimesecurity and freedom of navigation.  And let me add that the recent agreement to end theinsurgency in the south gives the Philippines an historic opportunity to forge a lasting peacehere at home, with greater security and prosperity for the people of that region.
I was proud to welcome President Aquino to the White House two years ago, and since thenwe’ve worked to deepen our cooperation and to modernize our alliances.  Our partnershipreflects an important Filipino concept -- bayanihan -- the idea that we have to work togetherto accomplish things that we couldn’t achieve on our own.
  
That’s what we saw last year when Typhoon Yolanda devastated so many communities.  Ourarmed forces and civilians from both our countries worked as one to rescue victims and todeliver lifesaving aid.  That’s what friends do for each other.  And, Mr. President, I want to sayto you and the people of the Philippines:  The United States will continue to stand with you asyou recover and rebuild.  Our commitment to the Philippines will not waver. 
Today, I’m pleased that we’re beginning an important new chapter in the relationship betweenour countries, and it starts with our security -- with the new defense cooperation agreementthat was signed today.  I want to be very clear:  The United States is not trying to reclaim oldbases or build new bases.  At the invitation of the Philippines, American servicemembers willrotate through Filipino facilities.  We’ll train and exercise more together so that we’re preparedfor a range of challenges, including humanitarian crises and natural disasters like Yolanda.
We’ll work together to build the Philippines’ defense capabilities and to work with othernations to promote regional stability, such as in the South China Sea.  And I’m lookingforward to my visit with forces from both our nations tomorrow to honor their service and tolook ahead to the future we can shape together.
As we strengthen our bilateral security cooperation, we’re also working together with regionalinstitutions like ASEAN and the East Asia Summit.  When we met in the Oval Office two yearsago, Benigno and I agreed to promote a common set of rules, founded in respect forinternational law, that will help the Asia Pacific remain open and inclusive as the region growsand develops. 
Today, we have reaffirmed the importance of resolving territorial disputes in the regionpeacefully, without intimidation or coercion.  And in that spirit, I told him that the UnitedStates supports his decision to pursue international arbitration concerning territorial disputesin the South China Sea. 
Finally, we agreed to keep deepening our economic cooperation.  I congratulated PresidentAquino on the reforms that he’s pursued to make the Philippines more competitive.  Throughour Partnership for Growth and our Millennium Challenge Corporation compact, we’re going tokeep working together to support these efforts so that more Filipinos can share in this nation’seconomic progress -- because growth has to be broad-based and it has to be inclusive. 
We discussed the steps that the Philippines could take to position itself for the Trans-PacificPartnership.  And I encouraged the President to seize the opportunity he’s created by openingthe next phase of economic reform and growth. 
Today, I’m announcing that my Commerce Secretary, Penny Pritzker, will lead a delegation ofAmerican business leaders to the Philippines this June to explore new opportunities.  And I’dadd that we’ve also committed to work together to address the devastating effects of climatechange and to make Philippine communities less vulnerable to extreme storms like Yolanda.
  
So, Mr. President, let me once again thank you for everything you’ve done to strengthen ouralliance and our friendship.  I’m looking forward to paying tribute to the bonds between ourpeople at the dinner tonight and to working with you as we write the next chapter in therelationship between our two countries.
Question:  Good afternoon, Your Excellencies.  President Aquino, President Obama --welcome to the Philippines.  My questions are:  How did the United States reassure thePhilippines that the U.S. is genuinely committed to countering an increasingly assertive Chinain the region?  Will the U.S. defend the Philippines in case the territorial dispute with China inthe West Philippine Sea or the South China Sea becomes an armed conflict?  And how do youthink will China react to the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement?  And what are yougoing to do with this that is consistent with your position to have the territorial disputesresolved in arbitration?  Thank you.
President Obama:  Well, I’ve been consistent throughout my travels in Asia.  We welcomeChina’s peaceful rise.  We have a constructive relationship with China.  There is enormoustrade, enormous business that’s done between the United States and China.  There are awhole range of issues on the international stage in which cooperation between the U.S. andChina are vital.  So our goal is not to counter China.  Our goal is not to contain China. 
Our goal is to make sure that international rules and norms are respected, and that includesin the area of maritime disputes.  We do not have claims in this area territorially.  We’re anAsia Pacific nation and our primary interest is the peaceful resolution of conflict, the freedomof navigation that allows for continued progress and prosperity.  And we don’t even take aspecific position on the disputes between nations. 
But as a matter of international law and international norms, we don’t think that coercion andintimidation is the way to manage these disputes.  And for that reason we’re very supportiveof President Benigno’s approach to go before the tribunal for the law of the sea and to seekinternational arbitration that can resolve this in a diplomatic fashion. 
With respect to the new Defense Cooperation Agreement that’s been signed, the goal here iswide-ranging.  We’ve had decades of alliance with the Philippines, but obviously in the 21stcentury we have to continue to update that.  And the goal for this agreement is to buildPhilippine capacity, to engage in training, to engage in coordination -- not simply to deal withissues of maritime security, but also to enhance our capabilities so that if there’s a naturaldisaster that takes place, we’re able to potentially respond more quickly; if there areadditional threats that may arise, that we are able to work in a cooperative fashion. 
This is consistent with, for example, the agreement that we have with Australia, in Darwin. Obviously, we’ve had a longstanding alliance with Australia, but we also recognize that ascircumstances change, as capacities change, we have to update that alliance to meet newneeds and new challenges. 
  
And so, I think this is going to be a terrific opportunity for us to work with the Philippines tomake sure that our navies, our air force are coordinated, to make sure that there’sinformation-sharing to allow us to respond to new threats, and to work with other countries,ASEAN countries -- Australia, Japan.  My hope is, is that at some point we’re going to be ableto work cooperatively with China as well, because our goal here is simply to make sure thateverybody is operating in a peaceful, responsible fashion.  When that happens, that allowscountries to focus on what’s most important to people day to day, and that is prosperity,growth, jobs.  Those are the things that we as leaders should be focused on, need to befocused on.  And if we have security arrangements that avoid conflict and dispute, then we’reable to place our attention on where we should be focused.
Mr. Carney:  The next question comes from Margaret Talev of Bloomberg.
Question:  Mr. President, later today we are expecting to hear about new sanctions on peopleclose to President Putin.  And I wanted to ask you, do you see this as a way to get to Mr.Putin’s personal wealth?  Do you believe that he has amassed personal wealth that’sunreported?  Or is it just a means of ratcheting up pressure before a move to sectoralsanctions?  You mentioned yesterday specifically the defense industry as an area where itdoesn’t make sense to move without Europe moving.  I wanted to ask you, are we likely tosee defense sanctions soon, banking and energy sanctions soon?  What kind of timeframe?
And then, President Aquino, if I may, I also wanted to ask you about China and the newagreement.  What I wanted to ask you is what message should China take away from the U.S.and the G7’s approach to Russia and Ukraine when it comes to territorial disputes?  And doyou believe that the military agreement that we’ve just been talking about will in and of itselfdeter China from being aggressive territorially, or should the U.S. begin  developing militaryoptions that could be possible contingencies if you needed to go that course?  Thanks.
President Obama:  You’re right, Margaret, that later today there will be an announcementmade, and I can tell you that it builds on the sanctions that were already in place.  As Iindicated, we saw an opportunity through the Geneva talks to move in the direction of adiplomatic resolution to the situation in Ukraine. 
The G7 statement accurately points out that the government in Kyiv, the Ukrainiangovernment, has, in fact, abided by that agreement and operated in good faith.  And we havenot seen comparable efforts by the Russians.  And as a consequence, we are going to bemoving forward with an expanded list of individuals and companies that will be affected bysanctions.  They remain targeted.  We will also focus on some areas of high-tech defenseexports to Russia that we don’t think are appropriate to be exporting in this kind of climate. 
The goal here is not to go after Mr. Putin, personally.  The goal is to change his calculus withrespect to how the current actions that he’s engaging in in Ukraine could have an adverseimpact on the Russian economy over the long haul, and to encourage him to actually walk thewalk and not just talk the talk when it comes to diplomatically resolving the crisis in Ukraine. 
  
There are specific steps that Russia can take.  And if it takes those steps, then you can see anelection taking place in Ukraine; you can see the rights of all people inside of Ukrainerespected. 
The Ukrainian government has put forward credible constitutional reforms of the sort thatoriginally Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the south and east said were part of theirgrievances, the failure to have their voices heard and represented.  Kyiv has responded tothose. 
And so there’s a path here to resolve this.  But Russia has not yet chosen to move forward,and these sanctions represent the next stage in a calibrated effort to change Russia’sbehavior.  We don’t yet know whether it’s going to work.  And that’s why the next phase if, infact, we saw further Russian aggression towards Ukraine could be sectoral sanctions, lessnarrowly targeted, addressing sectors like banking or the defense industry. 
So those would be more broad-based.  Those aren’t what we’ll be announcing today.  Today’swill be building on what we’ve already done and continue to be narrowly focused but will exactsome additional costs on the Russians.  But we are keeping in reserve additional steps that wecould take should the situation escalate further. 
President Aquino:  First of all, I think China shouldn’t be concerned about this agreement,especially if you look at what is being contemplated -- for instance, training for emergencydisaster relief operations. 
I’ll give you a perfect example.  The Americans have the V-22 Osprey aircraft, which is quite asignificant upgrade in capabilities in terms of reaching out to very remote areas.  We don’thave a comparable aircraft.  We have smaller helicopters.  And we had 44 of our provincesdevastated by Typhoon Haiyan.  Now, the training will not just train our people on how tooperate this particular aircraft, but more importantly, even help the Office of Civil Defense, forinstance, manage this resource in case a storm or another natural disaster of the scale thattranspired does happen.
Secondly, I think the statements that America has been making with regards to Ukraine is thesame message that has been said to China, and I guess not only by America but so manyother countries.  China itself has said repeatedly that they will and have been conforming tointernational law.  And the rest of the world is I think saying we are expecting you to confirmand, by actions, that which you have already been addressing by words, and not distortinternational law. 
The Philippines has not just won through arbitration, but we did remind obviously thePresident and our dialogue partners that in 2002 they tried to come up with a code of conductwith regards to the South China Sea and the portion which the Philippines claims, which wecall the West Philippine Sea.
  
And in 2012, the 10th anniversary, there had still been no progress even -- in the meeting. So the Philippines felt it was timely to raise the matter up and to remind everybody that thereis no code of conduct that binds us that sets the operational parameters for all to manage anypotential conflict.  And as a result of that, there has been preparatory meetings towards theformal meeting to try and constitute a code of conduct. 
So at the end of the day, we are not a threat militarily to any country.  We don’t even have --and I have said this often enough -- we don’t even have presently a single fighter aircraft inour inventory.  Now, we have I think legitimate needs.  We have a 36,000 kilometercoastline.  We do have an exclusive economic zone.  We do have concerns about poaching onour waters and preserving the environment and even protecting endangered species.  So Ithink no country should begrudge us our rights to be able to attend to our concerns and ourneeds. 
Question:  Good afternoon, Your Excellencies.  This question goes to President Obama, but Iwould also like to hear the thoughts of President Aquino.  I understand the tough balancingact that you need to do between China and your allies in Asia.  But do you believe that China’sexpansionism is a threat to regional peace and stability?  And will the Mutual Defense Treatyapply in the event that the territorial conflict with China escalates into an armed conflict?
President Obama:  Well, let me repeat what I said earlier.  I think that it is good for theregion and good for the world if China is successfully developing, if China is lifting more of itspeople out of poverty.  There are a lot of people in China, and the more they’re able todevelop and provide basic needs for their people and work cooperatively with other countriesin the region, that’s only going to strengthen the region -- that’s not going to weaken it.
I do think that, as President Aquino said very persuasively, that China as a large country hasalready asserted that it is interested in abiding by international law.  And really, our messageto China consistently on a whole range of issues is we want to be a partner with you inupholding international law.  In fact, larger countries have a greater responsibility in abidingby international norms and rules because when we move, it can worry smaller countries if wedon’t do it in a way that’s consistent with international law.
And I think that there are going to be territorial disputes around the world.  We haveterritorial disputes with some of our closest allies.  I suspect that there are some islands androcks in and around Canada and the United States where there are probably still somearguments dating back to the 1800s.  But we don’t go around sending ships and threateningfolks.  What we do is we sit down and we have some people in a room -- it’s boring, it’s notexciting, but it’s usually a good way to work out these problems and work out these issues. 
And I think that all the countries that I’ve spoken to in the region during the course of my trip-- Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, and now the Philippines -- their message has been the sameeverywhere I go, which is they would like to resolve these issues peacefully and
  
diplomatically.  That’s why I think that the approach that President Aquino has been taking,putting this before international arbitration, is a sound one.
And if China I think listens to its neighbors and recognizes that there’s another approach toresolve these disputes, what China will find is they’ve got ready and willing partnersthroughout the Asia Pacific region that want to work with them on trade and commerce andselling goods and buying goods.  And it’s inevitable that China is going to be a dominantpower in this region just by sheer size.  Nobody, I think, denies that.  The question is justwhether other countries in the region are also able to succeed and prosper on their own termsand tend to the various interests and needs that they and their people have as well.  Andthat’s what we support.
President Aquino:  I think from the onset, our message to China has been I think we’re allfocused on achieving greater prosperity for all our respective peoples, and prosperity andcontinued prosperity does not happen in a vacuum.  There has to be stability.  And in turn,they have responded that the disputes in the South China Sea/West Philippine Sea are not theend all, be all of our relationships.  And we have had good cooperation with them on so manydifferent fronts, and perhaps one could even argue that this is the only sore point in ourrelationship.
Now, having said that, perhaps -- we have tried to work on that particular premise of buildingup our ties on different aspects where there is no conflict or very little conflict.  And in thisparticular instance, I have to find the way and means by which we can both achieve ourrespective goals, which I believe are not -- or should not be mutually exclusive, but rathershould be inclusive if at the end of the day, we do want to strive for the prosperity of ourrespective peoples.
That I think has to be the primordial concern, rather than disputes on a few rocks that are notpossible to be inhabited.  And I think in due time, given the fact that there’s so muchcommerce that traverses this particular -- both in the maritime and the air domain -- China,which has achieved its goals of improving the life of its people, will see the soundness of thisproposal and perhaps will act more, shall we say, consistently and actively towards achievingthat stability for all.  That is our hope. 
Question:  Thank you to both Presidents.  President Aquino, as a journalist, I’d like to askyou why 26 journalists have been killed since you took office.  And I understand that therehave only been suspects arrested in six of those cases.  What are you doing to fix that?
President Obama, as you grappled here with all these national security challenges, I have twoquestions.  One, back home we’ve learned that 40 military veterans died while they werewaiting for health care, a very tragic situation.  I know you don’t run the Phoenix Office ofVeterans Affairs, but as Commander-in-Chief, what specifically will you pledge to fix that? 
  
And, secondly, more broadly -- big picture -- as you end this trip, I don’t think I have toremind you there have been a lot of unflattering portraits of your foreign policy right now. And rather than get into all the details or red lines, et cetera, I’d like to give you a chance tolay out what your vision is more than five years into office, what you think the Obamadoctrine is in terms of what your guiding principle is on all of these crises and how you answerthose critics who say they think the doctrine is weakness. 
President Obama:  Well, Ed, I doubt that I’m going to have time to lay out my entire foreignpolicy doctrine.  And there are actually some complimentary pieces as well about my foreignpolicy, but I’m not sure you ran them. 
Here’s I think the general takeaway from this trip.  Our alliances in the Asia Pacific have neverbeen stronger; I can say that unequivocally.  Our relationship with ASEAN countries inSoutheast Asia have never been stronger.  I don’t think that’s subject to dispute.  As recentlyas a decade ago, there were great tensions between us and Malaysia, for example.  And Ithink you just witnessed the incredible warmth and strength of the relationship between thosetwo countries. 
We’re here in the Philippines signing a defense agreement.  Ten years ago, fifteen years agothere was enormous tensions around our defense relationship with the Philippines.  And so it’shard to square whatever it is that the critics are saying with facts on the ground, events onthe ground here in the Asia Pacific region.  Typically, criticism of our foreign policy has beendirected at the failure to use military force.  And the question I think I would have is, why is itthat everybody is so eager to use military force after we’ve just gone through a decade of warat enormous costs to our troops and to our budget?  And what is it exactly that these criticsthink would have been accomplished?
My job as Commander-in-Chief is to deploy military force as a last resort, and to deploy itwisely.  And, frankly, most of the foreign policy commentators that have questioned ourpolicies would go headlong into a bunch of military adventures that the American people hadno interest in participating in and would not advance our core security interests. 
So if you look at Syria, for example, our interest is in helping the Syrian people, but nobodysuggests that us being involved in a land war in Syria would necessarily accomplish this goal. And I would note that those who criticize our foreign policy with respect to Syria, theythemselves say, no, no, no, we don’t mean sending in troops.  Well, what do you mean?  Well,you should be assisting the opposition -- well, we’re assisting the opposition.  What else doyou mean?  Well, perhaps you should have taken a strike in Syria to get chemical weaponsout of Syria.  Well, it turns out we’re getting chemical weapons out of Syria without havinginitiated a strike.  So what else are you talking about?  And at that point it kind of trails off.
  
In Ukraine, what we’ve done is mobilize the international community.  Russia has never beenmore isolated.  A country that used to be clearly in its orbit now is looking much more towardsEurope and the West, because they’ve seen that the arrangements that have existed for thelast 20 years weren’t working for them.  And Russia is having to engage in activities that havebeen rejected uniformly around the world.  And we’ve been able to mobilize the internationalcommunity to not only put diplomatic pressure on Russia, but also we’ve been able toorganize European countries who many were skeptical would do anything to work with us inapplying sanctions to Russia.  Well, what else should we be doing?  Well, we shouldn’t beputting troops in, the critics will say.  That’s not what we mean.  Well, okay, what are yousaying?  Well, we should be arming the Ukrainians more.  Do people actually think thatsomehow us sending some additional arms into Ukraine could potentially deter the Russianarmy?  Or are we more likely to deter them by applying the sort of international pressure,diplomatic pressure and economic pressure that we’re applying?
The point is that for some reason many who were proponents of what I consider to be adisastrous decision to go into Iraq haven’t really learned the lesson of the last decade, andthey keep on just playing the same note over and over again.  Why?  I don’t know.  But myjob as Commander-in-Chief is to look at what is it that is going to advance our securityinterests over the long term, to keep our military in reserve for where we absolutely need it. There are going to be times where there are disasters and difficulties and challenges allaround the world, and not all of those are going to be immediately solvable by us. 
But we can continue to speak out clearly about what we believe.  Where we can make adifference using all the tools we’ve got in the toolkit, well, we should do so.  And if there areoccasions where targeted, clear actions can be taken that would make a difference, then weshould take them.  We don't do them because somebody sitting in an office in Washington orNew York think it would look strong.  That's not how we make foreign policy.  And if you lookat the results of what we've done over the last five years, it is fair to say that our alliances arestronger, our partnerships are stronger, and in the Asia Pacific region, just to take oneexample, we are much better positioned to work with the peoples here on a whole range ofissues of mutual interest.
And that may not always be sexy.  That may not always attract a lot of attention, and itdoesn’t make for good argument on Sunday morning shows.  But it avoids errors.  You hitsingles, you hit doubles; every once in a while we may be able to hit a home run.  But westeadily advance the interests of the American people and our partnership with folks aroundthe world.
Question:  The Veterans Affairs --
President Obama:  You got me all worked up on the other one. The moment we heard aboutthe allegations around these 40 individuals who had died in Phoenix, I immediately orderedthe Secretary of Veterans Affairs, General Shinseki, to investigate.  We also have an IGinvestigation taking place.  And so we take the allegations very seriously.
  
That is consistent with what has been my rock-solid commitment to make sure that ourveterans are cared for.  I believe that if somebody has served our nation then they have toget the benefits and services that they have earned.  And my budgets have consistentlyreflected that.  That's why we’ve resourced the Veterans Affairs office more in terms ofincreases than any other department or agency in my government.
That doesn’t mean, though, that some folks may still not be getting the help that they need. And we're going to find out if, in fact, that's the case, and I'm interested in working witheverybody, whether it's our outstanding veteran service organizations or Congress, to makesure that there is not a single veteran in the United States who needs help -- whether becausethey’re homeless, because they’re sick, because they’re looking for a job.  I want to makesure that they are getting the help that they need.
President Aquino:  With regards to the killing of journalists, perhaps we should say from theoutset that I don't have the figures right here before me.  But we did set up an interagencycommittee to look on extralegal killings and forced disappearances, torture, and other graveviolations of right to life, liberty and security of persons. 
And in this particular body, there has been -- I have the figures for labor-related issues --there were 62 suspected cases of extrajudicial killings referred to it, and of the 62 investigations before this committee, there have been 10 that have been determined to fulfillthe criteria and the definitions of what constitutes an extrajudicial killing.  Of the 10 cases thathave been determined to be possible EJK cases, only one happened during our watch -- thecase of Mr. Estrellado. 
Now, as far as journalists are concerned, perhaps the track record speaks for itself.  TheMaguindanao massacre involved something like 52 journalists, and there are presentlysomething like over 100 people who have been indicted for this crime and are undergoingtrial.  That doesn’t mean that we have stopped trying to look for others potentially involved inthis particular killing.  And may we just state for the record that even when it comes tojournalists, it is not a policy of this state to silence critics.  All you have to do would be to turnon the TV, the radio, or look at any newspaper to find an abundance of criticisms.
Now, having said that, investigations have been done.  Anybody who has been killed obviouslyis a victim, and investigations have been ongoing.  If at times we do not reveal the discoveriesby our intelligence agencies and security services, perhaps we are very sensitive to personalrelationships by the people who are deceased who were killed not because of professionalactivities, but, shall we say, other issues.  But having said that, they were killed.  That isagainst the law.  And the people will have to be found, prosecuted and sent to jail.
The fourth plank of my promise when I ran for election was judicial reform, and this is still awork in progress.  We want to protect all the rights of every individual but also ensure thatthe speedy portion of the promise also happens.
  
Unfortunately, speed is not a hallmark of our current judicial system and there are varioussteps -- laws, amendments, particular laws -- even a rethink of the whole process to try andensure the speedy disposition of justice.
Thank you.
President Obama:  Thank you very much, everybody.
