Thank you.  Thank you, everybody.  Well, thank you, Janice.  And thanks to everybody herefor coming on this beautiful day.  Welcome to the White House.
About three weeks ago, as the federal government shut down, the Affordable Care Act’shealth insurance marketplaces opened for business across the country.  Well, we’ve nowgotten the government back open for the American people, and today I want to talk abouthow we’re going to get the marketplaces running at full steam, as well.  And I’m joined todayby folks who have either benefited from the Affordable Care Act already, or who are helpingtheir fellow citizens learn about what this law means for them and how they can get covered.
Of course, you’ve probably heard that HealthCare.gov -- the new website where people canapply for health insurance, and browse and buy affordable plans in most states -- hasn'tworked as smoothly as it was supposed to work.  And the number of people who have visitedthe site has been overwhelming, which has aggravated some of these underlying problems.
Despite all that, thousands of people are signing up and saving money as we speak.  ManyAmericans with a preexisting condition, like Janice, are discovering that they can finally gethealth insurance like everybody else.
So today, I want to speak to every American who’s looking to get affordable health insurance. I want you to know what’s available to you and why it may be a good deal for you.  And forthose who’ve had some problems with the website, I want to tell you what we’re doing tomake it work better and how you can sign up to get covered in other ways.
  
But before I do that, let me remind everybody that the Affordable Care Act is not just awebsite.  It's much more.  For the vast majority of Americans -- for 85 percent of Americanswho already have health insurance through your employer or Medicare or Medicaid -- youdon’t need to sign up for coverage through a website at all.  You've already got coverage. What the Affordable Care Act does for you is to provide you with new benefits and protectionsthat have been in place for some time.  You may not know it, but you're already benefitingfrom these provisions in the law.
For example, because of the Affordable Care Act, young people like Jasmine Jennings, andJessica Ugalde, and Ezra Salop, all of whom are here today, they’ve been able to stay on theirparents’ plans until they’re 26.  Millions of other young people are currently benefiting fromthat part of the law.  Another part of the Affordable Care Act is providing seniors with deeperdiscounts on their prescription medicine.  Billions of dollars have been saved by seniorsalready.  That’s part of the law.  It’s already in place.  It’s happening right now.
Already, because of the Affordable Care Act, preventive care like mammograms and birthcontrol are free through your employers.  That’s part of this law.  So there are a wide range ofconsumer protections and benefits that you already have if you’ve got health insurance.  Youmay not have noticed them, but you’ve got them, and they’re not going anywhere.  Andthey’re not dependent on a website.
Here’s another thing that the Affordable Care Act does.  In states where governors andlegislatures have wisely allowed it, the Affordable Care Act provides the opportunity for manyAmericans to get covered under Medicaid for the first time.  So in Oregon, for example, that’shelped cut the number of uninsured people by 10 percent just in the last three weeks.  Thinkabout that.  That’s 56,000 more Americans who now have health care.  That doesn’t dependon a website.
Now, if you’re one of the 15 percent of Americans who don’t have health insurance -- eitherbecause you can’t afford it or because your employer doesn’t offer it, or because you’re asmall businessperson and you have to go out on the individual market and buy it on your ownand it’s just too expensive -- October 1st was an important date.  That’s when we opened thenew marketplaces where people without health insurance, or who can’t afford healthinsurance, or who aren’t part of a group plan, can finally start getting affordable coverage.
And the idea is simple.  By enrolling in what we’re calling these marketplaces, you becomepart of a big group plan -- as if you were working for a big employer -- a statewide group planthat spreads risk between sick people and healthy people, between young and old, and thenbargains on your behalf for the best deal on health care.  What we’ve done is essentiallycreate a competition where there wasn’t competition before.  We created these big groupplans, and now insurers are really interested in getting your business.  And so insurers havecreated new health care plans with more choices to be made available through thesemarketplaces.
  
And as a result of this choice and this competition, prices have come down.  When you addthe new tax credits that many people are eligible for through the law, then the prices comedown even further.  So one study shows that through new options created by the AffordableCare Act, nearly 6 in 10 uninsured Americans will find that they can get covered for less than$100 a month.  Think about that.
Through the marketplaces, you can get health insurance for what may be the equivalent ofyour cell phone bill or your cable bill, and that’s a good deal.
So the fact is the product of the Affordable Care Act for people without health insurance isquality health insurance that’s affordable.  And that product is working.  It’s really good.  Andit turns out there’s a massive demand for it.  So far, the national website, HealthCare.gov, hasbeen visited nearly 20 million times.  Twenty million times. And there’s great demand at thestate level as well, because there are a bunch of states that are running their ownmarketplaces.
We know that nearly one-third of the people applying in Connecticut and Maryland, forexample, are under 35 years old.  They understand that they can get a good deal at low costs,have the security of health care, and this is not just for old folks like me -- that everybodyneeds good quality health insurance.  And all told, more than half a million consumers acrossthe country have successfully submitted applications through federal and state marketplaces. And many of those applications aren’t just for individuals, it’s for their entire families.  Soeven more people are already looking to potentially take advantage of the high quality,affordable insurance that is provided through the Affordable Care Act.
So let me just recap here.  The product is good.  The health insurance that’s being provided isgood.  It’s high quality and it’s affordable.  People can save money, significant money, bygetting insurance that’s being provided through these marketplaces.  And we know that thedemand is there.  People are rushing to see what’s available.  And those who have alreadyhad a chance to enroll are thrilled with the result.  Every day, people who were stuck withsky-high premiums because of preexisting conditions are getting affordable insurance for thefirst time, or finding, like Janice did, that they’re saving a lot of money.  Every day, womenare finally buying coverage that doesn’t charge them higher premiums than men for the samecare.  Every day, people are discovering that new health insurance plans have to covermaternity care, mental health care, free preventive care.
So you just heard Janice’s story -- she owns her own small business.  She recently becamethe first woman to enroll in coverage through Delaware’s exchange.  And it’s true, it took hera few tries, but it was worth it after being turned down for insurance three times due to minorpreexisting conditions.  So now she’ll be covered, she’ll save 150 bucks a month, and shewon’t have to worry that one illness or accident will cost her her business that she’s worked sohard to build.
  
And Janice is not alone.  I recently received a letter from a woman named Jessica Sanford inWashington State.  And here’s what she wrote:  “I am a single mom, no child support, self-
employed, and I haven’t had insurance for 15 years because it’s too expensive.  My son hasADHD and requires regular doctor visits and his meds alone cost $250 per month.  I have hadan ongoing tendinitis problem due to my line of work that I haven’t had treated.  Now, finally,we get to have coverage because of the ACA for $169 per month.  I was crying the other daywhen I signed up.  So much stress lifted.”
Now, that is not untypical for a lot of folks like Jessica who have been struggling withouthealth insurance.  That’s what the Affordable Care Act is all about.  The point is, the essenceof the law -- the health insurance that’s available to people -- is working just fine.  In somecases, actually, it’s exceeding expectations -- the prices are lower than we expected, thechoice is greater than we expected.
But the problem has been that the website that’s supposed to make it easy to apply for andpurchase the insurance is not working the way it should for everybody.  And there’s nosugarcoating it.  The website has been too slow, people have been getting stuck during theapplication process.  And I think it’s fair to say that nobody is more frustrated by that than Iam -- precisely because the product is good, I want the cash registers to work.  I want thecheckout lines to be smooth.  So I want people to be able to get this great product.  Andthere’s no excuse for the problems, and these problems are getting fixed.
But while we’re working out the kinks in the system, I want everybody to understand thenature of the problem.  First of all, even with all the problems at HealthCare.gov, the websiteis still working for a lot of people -- just not as quick or efficient or consistent as we want. And although many of these folks have found that they had to wait longer than they wanted,once they complete the process they’re very happy with the deal that’s available to them, justlike Janice’s.
Second, I want everybody to remember that we’re only three weeks into a six-month openenrollment period, when you can buy these new plans.  Keep in mind the insurance doesn’tstart until January 1st; that’s the earliest that the insurance can kick in.  No one who decidesto purchase a plan has to pay their first premium until December 15th.  And unlike the dayafter Thanksgiving sales for the latest Playstation or flat-screen TVs, the insurance plans don’trun out.  They’re not going to sell out.  They’ll be available through the marketplace --throughout the open enrollment period.  The prices that insurers have set will not change.  Soeverybody who wants insurance through the marketplace will get insurance, period. Everybody who wants insurance through the marketplace will get insurance.
Third, we are doing everything we can possibly do to get the websites working better, faster,sooner.  We’ve got people working overtime, 24/7, to boost capacity and address theproblems.  Experts from some of America’s top private-sector tech companies who, by theway, have seen things like this happen before, they want it to work.
  
They're reaching out.  They're offering to send help.  We’ve had some of the best IT talent inthe entire country join the team.  And we’re well into a “tech surge” to fix the problem.  Andwe are confident that we will get all the problems fixed.
Number four -- while the website will ultimately be the easiest way to buy insurance throughthe marketplace, it isn’t the only way.  And I want to emphasize this.  Even as we redoubleour efforts to get the site working as well as it’s supposed to, we’re also redoubling our effortsto make sure you can still buy the same quality, affordable insurance plans available on themarketplace the old-fashioned way -- offline, either over the phone or in person.
And, by the way, there are a lot of people who want to take advantage of this who are morecomfortable working on the phone anyway or in person.  So let me go through the specifics asto how you can do that if you’re having problems with the website or you just prefer dealingwith a person.
Yesterday, we updated the website’s home page to offer more information about the otheravenues to enroll in affordable health care until the online option works for everybody.  Soyou’ll find information about how to talk to a specialist who can help you apply over the phoneor to receive a downloadable application you can fill out yourself and mail in.
We’ve also added more staff to the call centers where you can apply for insurance over thephone.  Those are already -- they've been working.  But a lot of people have decided first togo to the website.  But keep in mind, these call centers are already up and running.  And youcan get your questions answered by real people, 24 hours a day, in 150 different languages. The phone number for these call centers is 1-800-318-2596.  I want to repeat that -- 1-800-
318-2596.  Wait times have averaged less than one minute so far on the call centers,although I admit that the wait times probably might go up a little bit now that I've read thenumber out loud on national television.
But the point is the call centers are available.  You can talk to somebody directly and they canwalk you through the application process.  And I guarantee you, if one thing is worth the wait,it’s the safety and security of health care that you can afford, or the amount of money thatyou can save by buying health insurance through the marketplaces.
Once you get on the phone with a trained representative, it usually takes about 25 minutesfor an individual to apply for coverage, about 45 minutes for a family.  Once you apply forcoverage, you will be contacted by email or postal mail about your coverage status.
But you don't have to just go through the phone.  You can also apply in person with the helpof local navigators -– these are people specially trained to help you sign up for health care,and they exist all across the country, or you can go to community health centers andhospitals.  Just visit LocalHelp.HealthCare.gov to find out where in your area you can get helpand apply for insurance in person.
  
And finally, if you’ve already tried to apply through the website and you’ve been stucksomewhere along the way, do not worry.  In the coming weeks, we will contact you directly,personally, with a concrete recommendation for how you can complete your application, shopfor coverage, pick a plan that meets your needs, and get covered once and for all.
So here’s the bottom line.  The product, the health insurance is good.  The prices are good.  Itis a good deal.  People don’t just want it; they’re showing up to buy it.  Nobody is madderthan me about the fact that the website isn’t working as well as it should, which means it’sgoing to get fixed.
And in the meantime, you can bypass the website and apply by phone or in person.  So don’tlet problems with the website deter you from signing up, or signing your family up, or showingyour friends how to sign up, because it is worth it.  It will save you money.  If you don't havehealth insurance, if you’ve got a preexisting condition, it will save you money and it will giveyou the security that your family needs.
In fact, even with the website issues, we’ve actually made the overall process of buyinginsurance through the marketplace a lot smoother and easier than the old way of buyinginsurance on your own.  Part of the challenge here is that a lot of people may not rememberwhat it’s like to buy insurance the traditional way.
The way we’ve set it up, there are no more absurdly long application forms.  There’s nomedical history questionnaire that goes on for pages and pages.  There’s no more gettingdenied because you’ve had a preexisting condition.  Instead of contacting a bunch of differentinsurers one at a time, which is what Janice and a lot of people who are shopping on theindividual market for health insurance had to do, there’s one single place you can go shop andcompare plans that have to compete for your business.  There’s one single phone number youcan call for help.  And once the kinks in the website have been ironed out, it will be an evensmoother and even easier.  But in the meantime, we will help you sign up -- becauseconsumers want to buy this product and insurance companies want to sell it to you.
Now, let me close by addressing some of the politics that have swirled around the AffordableCare Act.  I recognize that the Republican Party has made blocking the Affordable Care Act itssignature policy idea.  Sometimes it seems to be the one thing that unifies the party thesedays.  In fact, they were willing to shut down the government and potentially harm the globaleconomy to try to get it repealed.  And I’m sure that given the problems with the website sofar, they’re going to be looking to go after it even harder.  And let's admit it -- with thewebsite not working as well as it needs to work, that makes a lot of supporters nervousbecause they know how it's been subject to so much attack, the Affordable Care Act generally.
But I just want to remind everybody, we did not wage this long and contentious battle justaround a website.  That’s not what this was about.
  
We waged this battle to make sure that millions of Americans in the wealthiest nation on Earthfinally have the same chance to get the same security of affordable quality health care asanybody else.  That’s what this is about.  And the Affordable Care Act has done that.
People can now get good insurance.  People with preexisting conditions can now affordinsurance.  And if the launch of this website proves anything, it’s that people across thecountry don’t just need that security, they want that security.  They want it.  And in themeantime -- I’ve said many times -- I’m willing to work with anyone on any idea to make thislaw perform even better.  But it’s time for folks to stop rooting for its failure, becausehardworking, middle-class families are rooting for its success.  And if the product is good,they're willing to be patient.
I got a letter last week from a self-employed man named John Mier in Leetsdale,Pennsylvania.  He used the new marketplace to get himself and his wife covered and save alot of money.  And here’s what he said, because it pretty much sums up my message today: “Yes, the website really stank for the first week.”  “But instead of paying $1,600 per month fora group insurance plan, we have a plan that will only cost us $692 a month -- a savings of$900 per month.”  John said that while he saw -- when he saw what they’d be paying, heturned to his wife and told her, "We might just pull through.  We can afford this."  And Johneventually predicted that "the website will work like a champ."
So John, he was frustrated by the website, but he's feeling a little less frustrated once hefound out that he was saving 900 bucks a month on his health insurance.  And John is right,the website is going to get fixed and the law works.  That's why we fought so hard to pass thislaw -- to save folks like John money; to give people who don't have health insurance thechance to get it for the first time; to lift from the American people the crushing burden ofunaffordable health care; to free families from the pervasive fear that one illness -- [on-stagefemale audience member appears to losing consciousness] -- there you go, you are ok.  I'mright here.  I got you.  No, no -- you're okay.  This happens when I talk too long.  You'll beokay.  Here, why don't you go.
Good catch, by the way, whoever was here.
But that's always our goal, to free families from the pervasive fear that one illness or oneinjury might cost you everything that you dedicated a lifetime to build.  Our goal has alwaysbeen to declare that in this country the security of health care is not a privilege for a fortunatefew.  It's a right for all to enjoy.  That's what the Affordable Care Act is all about.  That's itspromise.  And I intend to deliver on that promise.
Thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you.
