Hello, Oregon!  Well, who arranged this day?   Every time I come to Oregon this is what itlooks like.  Yeah!  It never rains in Oregon, does it?
Audience:  No!
President Obama:  Never. 
Audience Member:  Don't come to California.
President Obama:  All right.  Well, listen, it is wonderful to see all of you.  First of all, pleasegive Mark another round of applause for his hospitality.  And thanks to everyone at Nike forhosting us today, here in “Federer Platz.”  You know, the White House is cool.  We’ve got abasketball court -- actually, it's a tennis court that we repainted some lines -- when I cameinto office.  So it's a combination basketball-tennis court.  There is a putting green thatPresident Eisenhower put in.  Can you imagine, by the way, if I had put in a putting green? Things have changed.   
But you’ve got all that and the 18th tee box from Pebble Beach.  Come on.  I’m sure some ofmy staff is running around right now in the Michael Jordan and Mia Hamm buildings -- theywant to be lab rats for your new gear.  
  
But it is wonderful to be here.  Please give it up for two people who fight every single day forOregon workers -- your Representatives in Congress -- they do a great job -- Earl Blumenauerand Suzanne Bonamici.  They are both here.  Give them a big round of applause.  Yay!  Andthere are two people who couldn't make it here today, but they’re doing a great job and youshould give them a round of applause as well, and that's Senator Ron Wyden andRepresentative Kurt Schrader.   
So it is great to be at the world headquarters of such an iconic company -- a company thathelps athletes succeed from the individual to the world stage.  And as you’ve heard, I’ve cometo Oregon to talk a little bit about trade -- which initially may have had some people thinking,what, is Mariota going someplace that we didn’t know about?  He’s going to be great. He’s anoutstanding young man.  He’s going to be terrific -- and from Hawaii, by the way.  Local boy. 
But this is important, and I want to tell you why I think trade deals and our willingness to goout there and compete on the global stage is so important.
Before I came out here, I had a chance to meet with some  small business owners from acrossOregon, whose workers make everything from bikes to tea to stationery to wine.  And theyknow how important this is to them.  Sometimes when we talk about trade, we think of Nike,or we think of Boeing, or we think of G.E. -- we think about these big multinationalcompanies.  But those small business leaders came here today because they understood thatthese markets outside the United States will help them grow, and will help them hire morefolks -- just as all the suppliers to Nike or Boeing or G.E. or any of these other companiesunderstand this is going to be critical to their growth and their ability to create new jobs.
In fact, that’s why Ron Wyden is not here -- because he’s in Washington, D.C. as we speakquarterbacking this effort on behalf of Oregon’s small business owners and workers.
Now, small businesses are the backbone of our economy.  Eventually, like Nike, they growsometimes into really, really big companies.  They employ millions of people; 98 percent ofexporters are small businesses.  They’re the ones who make Made in Oregon and Made in theUSA mean something.  And they represent something essential about this country -- thenotion that if you’ve got a good idea and you’re willing to work at it, you can turn that ideainto a business, you can growth that business, and eventually, who knows what mighthappen.  You can give other people a chance to earn a living even as you do well.  That’sAmerica’s promise.  And it’s up to us to keep that promise alive.
Now, that promise was threatened for almost everybody just about seven years ago, when theeconomy nearly collapsed, and millions of Americans lost their jobs and their homes and theirlife savings.  But thanks to the hard work of the American people and entrepreneurs like theones who are here today -- and some pretty good policies from my Administration -- we’re ina different place today.  We're in a different place today.
  
This morning, we learned that our economy created 223,000 new jobs last month.  Theunemployment rate ticked down again to 5.4 percent -- which is the lowest it’s been in almostseven years.  That’s 3 million new jobs over the past 12 months -- nearly the fastest pace inover a decade.  And all told, over the past 62 months in a row, America’s businesses havecreated 12.3 million new jobs.
I should add, by the way, 62 months ago is when I signed the Affordable Care Act.  So,obviously, it hasn’t done too bad in terms of employment in this country.  I just thought I’dmention that.  Since there were a lot of predictions of doom and gloom, I would just suggestthose who were making those predictions go back and check the statistics.  Just saying.
So small businesses deserve a lot of credit for that.  In fact, over the past several years, smallbusinesses have created nearly two out of every three new American jobs.  And the questionis, how do we build on that success?  We’ve got to be relentless in our efforts to support smallbusinesses who are creating jobs and helping to grow the economy.
And that’s been the purpose behind many of the policies I’ve fought for as President.  I’ve cuttaxes for small businesses more than a dozen times.  I’ve pushed for investments ininfrastructure and faster Internet.  It’s why we’ve made health care more accessible,affordable, portable -- to give people the freedom to change jobs or launch that startupwithout worrying about losing their health insurance.
And passing trade agreements is part of that agenda if those trade agreements are the rightkinds of trade agreements; if they make sure that they’re growing our businesses, and helpingAmerican workers by selling goods Made in America across the rest of the world.
And I’ve been talking a lot about this lately, because I view smart trade agreements as a vitalpiece of middle-class economics.  Not a contradiction to middle-class economics, it’s a partand parcel of it.
I believe that our country does best when everyone gets a fair shot, everyone does their fairshare, everybody plays by the same set of rules.  And that means making sure everybody hasgot a good education.  It means making sure that women are getting paid the same as menfor doing the same work.  It means making sure that folks have to have sick leave and familyleave and that they can balance work and family in a fair way.  It means, working to increasethe minimum wage all across this country -- because folks who have some of the toughestjobs oftentimes get the lowest pay.
That’s all part of middle-class economics, but, you know what, so is trade.  We strive to makesure our own economy lives up to high standards, but in a lot of parts of the world, the rulesare unfair.  The playing field is uneven.  That puts American businesses and American workersat a disadvantage.  So the question is, what should we do about it?
  
Some folks think we should just withdraw and not even try to engage in trade with thesecountries.  I disagree.  We have to make sure America writes the rules of the globaleconomy.  And we should do it today, while our economy is in the position of global strength. Because if we don’t write the rules for trade around the world -- guess what -- China will.  Andthey’ll write those rules in a way that gives Chinese workers and Chinese businesses the upperhand, and locks American-made goods out.
That’s the choice we face.  We're not going to be able to isolate ourselves from worldmarkets.  We got to be in there and compete.  And the question is, are we going to make surethat the rules are fair so that our businesses and our workers are on a level playing field. Because when they are, we win every time.  When the rules are fair, we win every time.
So this is why I’m such a strong supporter of new trade agreements.  They're going to helpour workers compete and our businesses compete.  This is not a left issue or a right issue, ora business or a labor issue.  It is about fairness and equity and access.  And like other issuesthat we’ve waged slow, steady fights on over the last seven years, this is also a question ofthe past versus the future.
So the Trans-Pacific Partnership that we’re working on, it’s the biggest trade deal that we'reworking on right now -- has to do with the Asia Pacific region.  And it reflects our values inways that, frankly, some previous trade agreements did not.  It’s the highest-standard, mostprogressive trade deal in history.  It’s got strong, enforceable provisions for workers,preventing things like child labor.  It’s got strong, enforceable provisions on the environment,helping us to do things that haven’t been done before, to prevent wildlife trafficking, ordeforestation, or dealing with our oceans.   And these are enforceable in the agreement.
And Nike operates in the Pacific region, so they understand the competitive pressures they'reunder.  Nike has factories all around the world.  And let’s face it, Mark I think doesn't mind mesaying it that some of these countries, they don't have the standards for wages and laborconditions that we have here.
So when you look at a country like Vietnam, under this agreement, Vietnam would actually,for the first time, have to raise its labor standards.  It would have to set a minimum wage. Itwould have to pass safe workplace laws to protect its workers. It would even have to protectworkers’ freedom to form unions -- for the very first time.  That would make a difference. That helps to level the playing field -- and it would be good for the workers in Vietnam, evenas it helps make sure that they’re not undercutting competition here in the United States.
So that’s progress.  It doesn’t mean that suddenly working conditions in Vietnam will be likethey are here at Nike.  Or here in Portland right away.  But it moves us in the right direction.
And if Vietnam, or any of the other countries in this trade agreement don’t meet theserequirements, they’ll face meaningful consequences.  If you’re a country that wants in to thisagreement, you have to meet higher standards.
  
If you don’t, you’re out.  If you break the rules, there are actual repercussions.  And that’sgood for American businesses and American workers, because we already meet higherstandards than most of the rest of the world, and that helps level the playing field.
And this deal would strengthen our hand overseas by giving us the tools to open othermarkets to our goods and services and make sure they play by the fair rules we help write. The truth is, we have one of the most open markets in the world.  Folks are already sellingstuff here.  We got to be able to sell there.  That requires us to enter into trade agreements toopen up their markets.
I hear Oregon wine is actually pretty good.  Somebody told me that the pinot noir in Oregon istop-notch, right?  I’ve got some winemakers right here.  Well, I want to make sure Japanesewine consumers have the opportunity to partake -- in our excellent Oregon wine.
We got some Oregon beef producers and ranchers around here.   Beef is really expensive inJapan.  Let’s make sure they try some Oregon steaks.  It’s good stuff.
And that’s one of the best things that can happen for our businesses and our workers --opening up markets that have previously been closed, particularly markets where they’realready selling stuff here.  There’s a lack of reciprocity.  It’s not a fair deal right now.  Wewant to make it fair.
Now, I want to acknowledge -- because this looks like a very well-read and informed crowd --that there have been a bunch of critics about trade deals generally and the Trans-PacificPartnership.  And what’s interesting is typically they’re my friends, coming from my party, andthey’re my fellow travelers on minimum wage and on job training and on clean energy.  Onevery progressive issue, they’re right there with me. And then on this one, they’re likewhooping on me.
But I tell you what.  I’ve run my last election, and the only reason I do something is because Ithink it’s good for American workers and the American people and the American economy.  Idon’t have any other rationale for doing what I do than I think it’s the best thing for theAmerican people.  And on this issue, on trade, I actually think some of my dearest friends arewrong.  They’re just wrong.  And here’s why.
First of all, they say that this trade agreement will cost American jobs.  And they’re reallybasing this on some past experience, looking at what happened in the ‘90s, over the last 20years, as there was a lot of outsourcing going on.  And you know what, past tradeagreements, it’s true, didn’t always reflect our values or didn’t always do enough to protectAmerican workers.  But that’s why we’re designing a different kind of trade deal.
And the truth is that companies that only care about low wages, they’ve already moved.  Theydon’t need new trade deals to move.  They’ve already outsourced.  They’ve already located insearch of low wages.
  
What this trade agreement would do is open the doors to the higher-skill, higher-wage jobs ofthe future -- jobs that we excel at.  It would make sure our manufacturers who are operatingat the higher end of the value chain are able to access these growing markets.  And the factis, over the past few years, our manufacturers have been steadily creating jobs for the firsttime since the 1990s -- under my Administration.  After more than a decade away from thetop spot, business leaders around the world have declared the United States is the world’snumber one place to invest for a third year in a row.  Third year in a row.
So the point is, outsourcing is already giving way to insourcing.  Companies are starting tomove back here to do more advanced manufacturing, and this is a trend we expect tocontinue.  This trade deal would help that.
Just this morning, as Mark may have mentioned, Nike announced that, with the Trans-PacificPartnership, it will make new investments in advanced manufacturing -- not overseas, butright here in the United States.  And far more Nike products would be made in the U.S.A.  Andthat means thousands of new jobs in manufacturing and engineering and design at Nikefacilities across the country, and potentially tens of thousands of new jobs along Nike’s supplychain here at home.  That’s what trade can do.
Look, I’ve spent six and a half years trying to rescue this economy -- six and a half years oftrying to revitalize American manufacturing, including rescuing an American auto industry thatwas on its back and is now fully recovered.  So I would not risk any of that if I thought thetrade deals were going to undermine it.  The reason I’m for this is because I think it willenhance it and advance it.  So that’s point number one.
Point number two -- when you ask folks specifically, what do you oppose about this tradedeal, they just say “NAFTA.”  NAFTA was passed 20 years ago.  That was a differentagreement.  And in fact, this agreement fixes some of what was wrong with NAFTA by makinglabor and environmental provisions actually enforceable.  I was just getting out of law schoolwhen NAFTA got passed.
Number three -- you’ve got some critics saying that any deal would be rushed through; it’s asecret deal, people don’t know what’s in it.  This is not true.  Any agreement that we finalizewith the other 11 countries will have to be posted online for at least 60 days before I evensign it.  Then it would go to Congress -- and you know they’re not going to do anything fast. So there will be months of review.  Every T crossed, every I dotted.  Everybody is going to beable to see exactly what’s in it.
There’s nothing fast-track about this.  This is a very deliberate track -- which will be fullysubject to scrutiny.  And I’m confident when people read the agreement for themselves,they’ll see that this is the most progressive trade deal in history.
  
Number four -- critics warn that parts of this deal would undermine American regulation --food safety, worker safety, even financial regulations.  They’re making this stuff up.  This isjust not true.  No trade agreement is going to force us to change our laws.  This agreementwould make sure our companies aren’t discriminated against in other countries.
We already treat companies from other countries fairly here. But our companies don’t alwaysget treated fairly there.  So sometimes they need to have some way to settle disputes whereit’s not subject to the whims of some government bureaucrat in that country.  That’simportant.  We want our businesses to succeed in selling over there because that's how ourworkers will get more jobs here in the United States.
And then finally, some critics talk about currency manipulation.  Now, this has been a problemin the past.  Some countries, they try to lower their currency so that it makes their goodscheaper, makes our more expensive.  There was a time when China was pretty egregiousabout this.  When I came into office, I started pounding on them.  Every time I meet withthem, I’d be talking about currency.  And we pushed back hard, and China moved.  In realterms, their currency has appreciated about 30 percent since I came into office.  And we'regoing to keep on going after it.  But that’s not an argument against this trade agreement.  Ifwe give up the chance to help our businesses sell their stuff in the world’s fastest-growingmarkets, that doesn't do anything to stop currency manipulation.
So the fact is, some folks are just opposed to trade deals out of principle, a reflexiveprinciple.  And what I tell them is, you know what, if you're opposed to these smart,progressive trade deals, then that means you must be satisfied with the status quo.  And thestatus quo hasn’t been working for our workers.  It hasn’t been working for our businesses. And there are people here who will tell you why.
I’m going to just give you a couple of examples of small businesses who I had a chance tomeet with today.  Egg Press is a Portland-based greeting card company.  Really nice. They selltheir cards in Australia, which is a member of this Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement.  TheirCEO, Tess Darrow -- where’s Tess?  Raise your hand.  I saw her.  There she is.  So Tess saysthat if they could more easily reach customers in Japan, as well, they’d sell half the volumethat they do here in America.  That’s a lot.
Right now, the logistics of exporting to Japan are too complicated.  Products end up being heldup for months at the border.  This agreement would help solve some of those problems soTess can sell more greeting cards in Japan -- presumably in Japanese.  Is there going to be --there will be a translation process, I assume.  Yes, absolutely.  I’m teasing.
So the trade deal would help eliminate barriers, and simplify customs, and hold countriesaccountable for getting products delivered swiftly.  The more Tess sells, the more she cangrow, the more she can hire here in Oregon, here in the United States.
  
Oregon Fruit Products -- makes canned fruits, berries, other products -- depends on exportsfor 20 percent of its annual sales.  Right now, it exports to four members of this partnershipthat we're putting together:  Japan, Australia, Singapore, and Canada.  Unfortunately, sellingin these countries right now can mean dealing with unfair rules designed to prevent ourproducts from being offered in their markets.  Under this agreement, that would change. Exporting becomes simpler, more consistent.  That means more people around the worldeating Oregon berries all year long.  Berry tasty.
Sokol Blosser Winery -- we got a lot of drinkers here.  It’s a winery, family-run in Dayton,Oregon.  One of its top export markets is Japan.  Right now, there are high tariffs onAmerican wine in that country.  Under this trade partnership, those tariffs would beeliminated, and wineries across America could see their sales grow overseas.  The brother  --
and-sister team that runs this vineyard -- wave, guys -- they say, “If we can make it easier todo business with countries that are already our trading partners, countries that are allies,that’s a good thing.”
They’re right.  This deal would be a good thing.  So let’s “just do it.”  It took a while for you tocatch that, didn’t it?  I thought that was pretty obvious.
So, listen, I know a lot of folks who are skeptical about trade.  Past trade deals didn’t alwayslive up to the hype.  Labor and environmental protections weren’t always strong enough. Isaw for years, in Chicago and towns across Illinois, manufacturing collapsing, jobs drying up. Outsourcing is real.  Folks didn’t just make that up.  Some of our manufacturing base shiftedover the last 25 years, and it wasn’t good for manufacturing and it wasn’t good for thosecommunities, and it wasn’t good for workers.  That’s the truth.  It had benefits -- other jobswere created, we got cheaper goods.  But there was real displacement and real pain.  And so,for many Americans, this is not an abstraction; this is real.
But we’ve got to learn the right lessons from that.  The lesson is not that we pull up thedrawbridge and build a moat around ourselves.  The lesson is, is that we’ve got to make surethat the trade deals that we do shape are ones that allow us to compete fairly.
So when I took office, I decided we could rethink the way we do trade in a way that actuallyworks for working Americans.  I didn’t think this was the right thing to do just for companies. If I didn’t think this was the right thing to do for working families, I would not be fighting forit.  If any agreement undercuts working families, I won’t sign it.  I ran for office to expandopportunity for everybody -- the all-American idea that no matter who you are, or where youcome from, or how you started out, or who you love, in America you can make it if you try.
So, yes, we should be mindful of the past, but we can’t ignore the realities of the neweconomy.  We can’t stand on the beaches and stop the global economy at our shores.  We’vegot to harness it on our terms.  This century is built for us.  It’s about innovation.  It’s aboutdynamism and flexibility and entrepreneurship, and information and knowledge and scienceand research.  That’s us.
  
So we can’t be afraid of it; we’ve got to seize it.  We’ve got to give every single American whowakes up, sends their kids to school, rolls up their sleeves, punches in every day the chanceto do what they do best:  dream up, innovate, build, sell the best products and ideas in theworld to every corner of the world.
Because, Nike, we do not just have the best athletes in the world.  We also have the bestworkers in the world.   We also have the best businesses in the world.  And when the playingfield is level, nobody beats the United States of America.  Nobody beats the United States ofAmerica.
Just do it, everybody.  Thank you.  God bless you.
Thank you, Oregon.  Thank you.
God bless America.
