Good morning, everybody.
It’s now been five days since the heartbreaking tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut; three dayssince we gathered as a nation to pray for the victims. And today, a few more of the 20 smallchildren and six educators who were taken from us will be laid to rest.
We may never know all the reasons why this tragedy happened. We do know that every daysince, more Americans have died of gun violence.  We know such violence has terribleconsequences for our society.  And if there is even one thing that we can do to prevent any ofthese events, we have a deep obligation -- all of us -- to try.
Over these past five days, a discussion has reemerged as to what we might do not only todeter mass shootings in the future, but to reduce the epidemic of gun violence that plaguesthis country every single day.  And it’s encouraging that people of all different backgroundsand beliefs and political persuasions have been willing to challenge some old assumptions andchange longstanding positions.
That conversation has to continue.  But this time, the words need to lead to action.
  
We know this is a complex issue that stirs deeply held passions and political divides.  And as Isaid on Sunday night, there’s no law or set of laws that can prevent every senseless act ofviolence in our society.  We’re going to need to work on making access to mental health careat least as easy as access to a gun.  We’re going to need to look more closely at a culture thatall too often glorifies guns and violence.  And any actions we must take must begin inside thehome and inside our hearts.
But the fact that this problem is complex can no longer be an excuse for doing nothing.  Thefact that we can’t prevent every act of violence doesn’t mean we can’t steadily reduce theviolence, and prevent the very worst violence.
That’s why I’ve asked the Vice President to lead an effort that includes members of myCabinet and outside organizations to come up with a set of concrete proposals no later thanJanuary -- proposals that I then intend to push without delay.  This is not some Washingtoncommission.  This is not something where folks are going to be studying the issue for sixmonths and publishing a report that gets read and then pushed aside.  This is a team that hasa very specific task, to pull together real reforms right now.  I asked Joe to lead this effort inpart because he wrote the 1994 Crime Bill that helped law enforcement bring down the rate ofviolent crime in this country.  That plan -- That bill also included the assault weapons ban thatwas publicly supported at the time by former Presidents including Ronald Reagan.
The good news is there’s already a growing consensus for us to build from.  A majority ofAmericans support banning the sale of military-style assault weapons.  A majority ofAmericans support banning the sale of high-capacity ammunition clips.  A majority ofAmericans support laws requiring background checks before all gun purchases, so thatcriminals can’t take advantage of legal loopholes to buy a gun from somebody who won’t takethe responsibility of doing a background check at all.
I urge the new Congress to hold votes on these measures next year in a timely manner.  Andconsidering Congress hasn’t confirmed a director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, andFirearms in six years -- the agency that works most closely with state and local lawenforcement to keep illegal guns out of the hands of criminals -- I’d suggest that they makethis a priority early in the year.
Look, like the majority of Americans, I believe that the Second Amendment guarantees anindividual right to bear arms.  This country has a strong tradition of gun ownership that’s beenhanded down from generation to generation.  Obviously across the country there are regionaldifferences.  There are differences between how people feel in urban areas and rural areas. And the fact is the vast majority of gun owners in America are responsible -- they buy theirguns legally and they use them safely, whether for hunting or sport shooting, collection orprotection.
  
But you know what, I am also betting that the majority -- the vast majority -- of responsible,law-abiding gun owners would be some of the first to say that we should be able to keep anirresponsible, law-breaking few from buying a weapon of war.  I’m willing to bet that theydon’t think that using a gun and using common sense are incompatible ideas -- that anunbalanced man shouldn’t be able to get his hands on a military-style assault rifle so easily;that in this age of technology, we should be able to check someone’s criminal records beforehe or she can check out at a gun show; that if we work harder to keep guns out of the handsof dangerous people, there would be fewer atrocities like the one in Newtown -- or any of thelesser-known tragedies that visit small towns and big cities all across America every day.
Since Friday morning, a police officer was gunned down in Memphis, leaving four childrenwithout their mother.  Two officers were killed outside a grocery store in Topeka.  A womanwas shot and killed inside a Las Vegas casino.  Three people were shot inside an Alabamahospital.  A four-year-old was caught in a drive-by in Missouri, and taken off life support justyesterday. Each one of these Americans was a victim of the everyday gun violence that takesthe lives of more than 10,000 Americans every year -- violence that we cannot accept asroutine.
So I will use all the powers of this office to help advance efforts aimed at preventing moretragedies like this.  We won’t prevent them all -- but that can’t be an excuse not to try.  Itwon’t be easy -- but that can't be an excuse not to try.
And I'm not going to be able to do it by myself.  Ultimately if this effort is to succeed it’s goingto require the help of the American people -- it’s going to require all of you.  If we're going tochange things, it’s going to take a wave of Americans -- mothers and fathers, daughters andsons, pastors, law enforcement, mental health professionals -- and, yes, gun owners --standing up and saying “enough” on behalf of our kids.
It will take commitment and compromise, and most of all, it will take courage.  But if those ofus who were sent here to serve the public trust can summon even one tiny iota of the couragethose teachers, that principal in Newtown summoned on Friday -- if cooperation and commonsense prevail -- then I’m convinced we can make a sensible, intelligent way to make theUnited States of America a safer, stronger place for our children to learn and to grow.
Thank you.  And now I'm going to let the Vice President go and I'm going to take a fewquestions.  And I will start with Ben Feller.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I'd like to ask you about the other serious issueconsuming this town right now, the fiscal cliff.
President Obama:  Right.
  
Question:  Haven’t you betrayed some of the voters who supported you in the election bychanging your positions on who should get a tax increase and by including Social Securitybenefits now in this mix?  And more broadly, there seems to be a deepening sense thatnegotiations aren't going very well right now.  Can you give us a candid update?  Are we likelyto go over the cliff?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, there's no reason why we should.  Remember what Isaid during the campaign.  I thought that it was important for us to reduce our deficit in abalanced and responsible way.  I said it was important for us to make sure that millionairesand billionaires paid their fair share.  I said that we were going to have to make some toughcuts, some tough decisions on the spending side, but what I wouldn't do was hurt vulnerablefamilies only to pay for a tax cut for somebody like me.  And what I said was that the ultimatepackage would involve a balance of spending cuts and tax increases.
That's exactly what I've put forward.  What I've said is, is that in order to arrive at acompromise, I am prepared to do some very tough things -- some things that someDemocrats don't want to see and probably there are a few Republicans who don't want to seeeither.  But the only way that we're going to be able to stabilize the economy, make surewe've got a platform for long-term economic growth, that we get our deficits under controland we make sure that middle-class families are protected is if we come up with somethingthat members of both parties in Congress can support.
And that's the plan that I've put forward.  I have gone at least halfway in meeting some of theRepublicans' concerns, recognizing that even though we campaigned on these issues, eventhough the majority of Americans agree with me that we should be raising taxes on thewealthiest few as a means of reducing the deficit, I have also said that I'm willing to identifysome spending cuts that make sense.
And, frankly, up until about a couple of days ago, if you looked at it, the Republicans in theHouse and Speaker Boehner I think were in a position to say, we've gotten a fair deal.  Thefact that they haven't taken it yet is puzzling and I think a question that you're going to haveto address to them.
I remain optimistic, though, because if you look at what the Speaker has proposed, he'sconceded that income tax rates should go up -- except right now he only wants to have themgo up for millionaires.  If you're making $900,000, somehow he thinks that you can't afford topay a little more in taxes.  But the principle that rates are going to need to go up he'sconceded.
I've said I'm willing to make some cuts.  What separates us is probably a few hundred billiondollars.  The idea that we would put our economy at risk because you can't bridge that gapdoesn’t make a lot of sense.
  
So I'm going to continue to talk to the Speaker and the other leaders up in Congress.  But,ultimately, they've got to do their job.  Right now their job is to make sure that middle-classtaxes do not go up and that we have a balanced, responsible package of deficit reduction.
It is there for all to see.  It is a deal that can get done. But it is not going to be -- it cannot bedone if every side wants 100 percent.  And part of what voters were looking for is somecompromise up here.  That’s what folks want.  They understand that they're not going to get100 percent of what they want.  And for some reason, that message has not yet taken up onCapitol Hill.
And when you think about what we've gone through over the last couple of months -- adevastating hurricane, and now one of the worst tragedies in our memory -- the countrydeserves folks to be willing to compromise on behalf of the greater good, and not tanglethemselves up in a whole bunch of ideological positions that don’t make much sense.
So I remain not only open to conversations, but I remain eager to get something done.  I'dlike to get it done before Christmas.  There's been a lot of posturing up on Capitol Hill, insteadof just going ahead and getting stuff done.  And we've been wasting a lot of time.  It is theright thing to do.  I'm prepared to get it done.  But they're going to have to go ahead andmake some adjustments.
And I'll just give you one other example.  The Speaker now is proposing what he calls plan B. So he says, well, this would raise taxes only on folks making a million dollars or more.  Whatthat means is an average of a $50,000 tax break for every millionaire out there, at the sametime as we're not providing unemployment insurance for 2 million people who are still outthere looking for work.  It actually means a tax increase for millions of working families acrossthe country at the same time as folks like me would be getting a tax break.  That violates thecore principles that were debated during the course of this election and that the Americanpeople determined was the wrong way to go.
And so my hope is, is that the Speaker and his caucus, in conjunction with the otherlegislative leaders up there, can find a way to make sure that middle-class families don’t seetheir taxes go up on January 1st; that we make sure that those things that middle-classfamilies count on like tax credits for college, or making sure that they’re getting some helpwhen it comes to raising their kids through things like the child tax credit, that that gets done;and that we have a balanced package for deficit reduction, which is exactly what I’ve putforward.
Question:  Will you give more ground if you need to, or are you done?
President Obama:  If you look at the package that I put forward, it is a balanced package byany definition.  We have put forward real cuts in spending that are hard to do, in everycategory.
  
And by any measure, by any traditional calculation, by the measures that Republicansthemselves have used in the past, this would be as large a piece of deficit reduction as we’veseen in the last 20 years.  And if you combine that with the increased revenue from thewealthy paying a little bit more, then you actually have something that would stabilize ourdeficit and debt for a decade -- for 10 years.
Now, the notion that we would not do that, but instead the Speaker would run a play thatkeeps tax cuts for folks making $500,000 or $700,000 or $800,000 or $900,000 a year, andgives more tax breaks to millionaires and billionaires, and raises taxes on middle-classfamilies, and then has no cuts in it -- which is what he says he wants -- doesn’t make muchsense.
I mean, let’s just think about the logic for a second.  They’re thinking about voting for raisingtaxes at least on folks over a million, which they say they don’t want to do, but they’re goingto reject spending cuts that they say they do want to do.  That defies logic.  There’s noexplanation for that.
I think that any objective person out there looking would say that we’ve put forward a verybalanced plan and it’s time for us to go ahead and get it done.  That’s what the country needsright now.  Because I think folks have been through some wrenching times, we’re stillrecovering from a very tough recession, and what they’re hoping for is a sense of stability,focus, compromise, common sense over the next couple of years.  And I think we can provideit.  But this is a good test for them.
Carol Lee.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Just to follow on Ben's question, what is your nextmove?  Are we in a position now where you're just waiting for the Speaker to make a move?
President Obama:  Well, I'm going to reach out to all the leaders involved over the nextcouple of days and find out what is it that's holding this thing up.  What is holding it up?  Ifthe argument from Republicans is we haven't done enough spending cuts, that argument isnot going to fly because we've got close to a trillion dollars of spending cuts.  And when youadd interest, then it's more than a trillion dollars in spending cuts.
If the argument is that they can't do -- they can't increase tax rates on folks making $700,000or $800,000 a year, that's not a persuasive argument to me and it's certainly not a persuasiveargument to the American people.
It may be that members of their caucus haven't looked at exactly what we've proposed.  Itmay be that if we provide more information or there's greater specificity or we work throughsome of their concerns, that we can get some movement then.
  
But the fact of the matter is, is that what would violate my commitment to voters is if I endedup agreeing to a plan that put more of the burden on middle-class families and less of aburden on the wealthy in an effort to reduce our deficit.  That's not something I'm going todo.  What would violate my commitment to voters would be to put forward a plan that makesit harder for young people to go to college, that makes it harder for a family with a disabledkid to care for that kid.
And there's a threshold that you reach where the balance tips, even in making compromisesthat are required to get something done in this town, where you are hurting people in order togive another advantage to folks who don't need help.  And we had an extensive debate aboutthis for a year.  And not only does the majority of the American people agree with me, abouthalf of Republican voters agree with me on this.
So at some point, there's got to be I think a recognition on the part of my Republican friendsthat -- take the deal.  They will be able to claim that they have worked with me over the lasttwo years to reduce the deficit more than any other deficit reduction package; that we willhave stabilized it for 10 years. That is a significant achievement for them.  They should beproud of it.  But they keep on finding ways to say no, as opposed to finding ways to say yes.
And I don’t know how much of that just has to do with -- it is very hard for them to say yes tome.  But at some point, they’ve got to take me out of it and think about their voters, andthink about what’s best for the country.  And if they do that -- if they’re not worried aboutwho’s winning and who’s losing, did they score a point on the President, did they extract thatlast little concession, did they force him to do something he really doesn’t want to do just forthe heck of it, and they focus on actually what’s good for the country, I actually think we canget this done.
Question:   You mentioned the $700,000 and $800,000.  Are you willing to move on incomelevel and are there specific things that you would do --
President Obama:  I’m not going to get into specific negotiations here.  My point is simple,Carol, that if you look at Speaker Boehner’s proposal and you look at my proposal, they’reactually pretty close.  They keep on saying that somehow we haven’t put forward realspending cuts. Actually, there was I think a graph in The New York Times today that showed -
- they’re the same categories, right?  There’s a little bit of tweaks here and there; there are afew differences, but we’re right there.
And on the revenue side, there’s a difference in terms of them wanting to preserve tax breaksfor folks between $250,000 and a million that we just can’t afford.  I mean, keep in mind I’min that income category; I’d love to not pay as much in taxes.  But I also think it’s the rightthing to do for us to make sure that people who have less -- people who are working, peoplewho are striving, people who are hoping for their kids -- that they have opportunity.  That’swhat we campaigned about.  That’s what we talked about.
  
And this is not a situation where I’m unwilling to compromise.  This is not a situation whereI’m trying to rub their face in anything.  I think anybody who looks at this objectively wouldsay that coming off my election, I have met them at least halfway in order to get somethingdone for the country.
And so I noticed that there were a couple of headlines out there saying, oh, we’re now in theland of political posturing, and it’s the usual he said-he said atmosphere.  But look at thefacts.  Look at where we started; look at where they started.  My proposal is right there in themiddle.
We should be able to get this done.  Let’s get it done.  We don’t have a lot of time.
Carrie.  Where’s -- there you are.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:  What is your level of confidence that if you are able to reach a comprehensivedeal with the Speaker, that he will be able to bring his members onboard and get it passed? Essentially, do you still trust Speaker Boehner in this process?
President Obama:  There is no doubt that the Speaker has challenges in his caucus, and Irecognize that.  I’m often reminded when I speak to the Republican leadership that themajority of their caucus’s membership come from districts that I lost.  And so sometimes theymay not see an incentive in cooperating with me, in part because they’re more concernedabout challenges from a tea party candidate, or challenges from the right, and cooperatingwith me may make them vulnerable.  I recognize that.
But, goodness, if this past week has done anything, it should just give us some perspective. If there’s one thing we should have after this week, it should be a sense of perspective aboutwhat’s important.  And I would like to think that members of that caucus would say tothemselves:  You know what, we disagree with the President on a whole bunch of things.  Wewish the other guy had won.  We’re going to fight him on a whole range of issues over thenext four years.  We think his philosophy is all screwed up.  But right now, what the countryneeds is for us to compromise, get a deficit reduction deal in place; make sure middle classtaxes don’t go up; make sure that we’re laying the foundations for growth; give certainty tobusinesses large and small; not put ourselves through some sort of self-inflicted crisis everysix months; allow ourselves time to focus on things like preventing the tragedy in Newtownfrom happening again; focus on issues like energy and immigration reform and all the thingsthat will really make a determination as to whether our country grows over the next fouryears, 10 years, 40 years.
  
And if you just pull back from the immediate political battles, if you kind of peel off thepartisan war paint, then we should be able to get something done.
And I think the Speaker would like to get that done.  I think an environment needs to becreated within not just the House Republican caucus, but also among Senate Republicans thatsay, the campaign is over and let’s see if we can do what’s right for the country -- at least forthe next month.  And then we can reengage in all the other battles that they’ll want to fight.
Question:  If you don’t get it done, Republicans have said they’ll try to use the debt limit as anext pressure point.  Would you negotiate with them in that context?
President Obama:  No.  And I’ve been very clear about this.  This is the United States ofAmerica, the greatest country on Earth, the world’s economic superpower.  And the idea thatwe lurch from crisis to crisis, and every six months, or every nine months, that we threatennot to pay our bills on stuff we’ve already bought, and default, and ruin the full faith andcredit of the United States of America -- that’s not how you run a great country.
So I’ve put forward a very clear principle:  I will not negotiate around the debt ceiling.  We’renot going to play the same game that we saw happen in 2011 -- which was hugelydestructive; hurt our economy; provided more uncertainty to the business community thananything else that happened.
And I'm not alone in this.  If you go to Wall Street, including talking to a whole bunch of folkswho spent a lot of money trying to beat me, they would say it would be disastrous for us touse the debt ceiling as a cudgel to try to win political points on Capitol Hill.
So we're not going to do that -- which is why I think that part of what I hope over the nextcouple of days we see is a recognition that there is a way to go ahead and get what it is thatyou've been fighting for.  These guys have been fighting for spending cuts.  They can getsome very meaningful spending cuts. This would amount to $2 trillion -- $2 trillion -- inspending cuts over the last couple of years.  And in exchange, they're getting a little over atrillion dollars in revenue.  And that meets the pledge that I made during the campaign, whichwas $2 to $2.50 of spending cuts for every revenue increase.  And that's an approach that Ithink most Americans think is appropriate.
But I will not negotiate around the debt ceiling.  We're not going to do that again.
Question:  Sir, may I ask a question about Newtown, please?
President Obama:  Yes, I've got David Jackson.
  
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Getting back to the gun issue, you alluded to the factthat Washington commissions don't have the greatest reputation in the world.  What makesyou think this one is going to be different given the passage of time and the political power ofgun rights groups like the National Rifle Association?
President Obama:  Well, this is not going to be a commission. Joe is going to gather upsome key Cabinet members who have an interest in this issue.  We're going to reach out to abunch of stakeholders.  We're going to be reaching out to members of Congress who have aninterest in this issue.  It's not as if we have to start from scratch.  There are a whole bunch ofproposals that have been thought about, debated, but hopefully also some new ideas in termsof how we deal with this issue.
Their task is going to be to sift through every good idea that's out there, and even take a lookat some bad ideas before disposing of them, and come up with a concrete set ofrecommendations in about a month.  And I would hope that our memories aren't so short thatwhat we saw in Newtown isn't lingering with us, that we don't remain passionate about it onlya month later. And as soon as we get those recommendations, I will be putting forward veryspecific proposals.  I will be talking about them in my State of The Union and we will beworking with interested members of Congress to try to get some of them done.
And the idea that we would say this is terrible, this is a tragedy, never again, and we don’thave the sustained attention span to be able to get this done over the next several monthsdoesn’t make sense.  I have more confidence in the American people than that.  I have moreconfidence in the parents, the mothers and fathers that I’ve been meeting over the lastseveral days all across the country from all political persuasions, including a lot of gun owners,who say, you know what, this time we’ve got to do things differently.
Question:  What about the NRA?
President Obama:  Well, the NRA is an organization that has members who are mothers andfathers.  And I would expect that they’ve been impacted by this as well. And hopefully they’lldo some self-reflection.
And here’s what we know -- that any single gun law can’t solve all these problems.  We’regoing to have to look at mental health issues.  We’re going to have to look at schools.  Thereare going to be a whole range of things that Joe’s group looks at.  We know that issues of gunsafety will be an element of it. And what we’ve seen over the last 20 years, 15 years, is thesense that anything related to guns is somehow an encroachment on the Second Amendment.What we’re looking for here is a thoughtful approach that says we can preserve our SecondAmendment, we can make sure that responsible gun owners are able to carry out theiractivities, but that we’re going to actually be serious about the safety side of this; that we’regoing to be serious about making sure that something like Newtown or Aurora doesn’t happenagain.
  
And there is a big chunk of space between what the Second Amendment means and having norules at all.  And that space is what Joe is going to be working on to try to identify where wecan find some common ground.
So I’ve got -- I’m going to take one last question.
Go ahead, Jake.
Question:  It seems to a lot of observers that you made the political calculation in 2008 inyour first term and in 2012 not to talk about gun violence.  You had your position on renewingthe ban on semiautomatic rifles that then-Senator Biden put into place, but you didn’t domuch about it.  This is not the first issue -- the first incident of horrific gun violence of yourfour years.  Where have you been?
President Obama:  Well, here’s where I’ve been, Jake.  I’ve been President of the UnitedStates dealing with the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, an auto industry onthe verge of collapse, two wars.  I don’t think I’ve been on vacation.
And so I think all of us have to do some reflection on how we prioritize what we do here inWashington.  And as I said on Sunday, this should be a wake-up call for all of us to say that ifwe are not getting right the need to keep our children safe, then nothing else matters.  Andit’s my commitment to make sure that we do everything we can to keep our children safe.
A lot of things go in -- are involved in that, Jake.  So making sure they’ve got decent healthcare and making sure they’ve got a good education, making sure that their parents have jobs-- those are all relevant as well.  Those aren’t just sort of side issues.  But there’s no doubtthat this has to be a central issue.  And that’s exactly why I’m confident that Joe is going totake this so seriously over the next couple months.
All right.  Thank you, everybody.
