Hey, Chicago!  Hello, Chicago! Hello, everybody. Hello, Hyde Park! It is good to be home! It isgood to be home! Everybody have a seat. You all relax. It’s just me. You all know me. It isgood to be back home.
A couple of people I want to acknowledge -- first of all, I want to thank your Mayor, my greatfriend, Rahm Emanuel for his outstanding leadership of the city and his kind introduction.  Iwant to thank everybody here at Hyde Park Academy for welcoming me here today.
I want to acknowledge your principal and your assistant principal -- although, they reallymake me feel old, because when I saw them -- where are they? Where are they? Stand up.Stand up.  They are doing outstanding work. We’re very, very proud them. But you do makeme feel old. Sit down.
A couple other people I want to acknowledge -- Governor Pat Quinn is here doing great workdown in Springfield.  My great friend and senior Senator Dick Durbin is in the house. Congressman Bobby Rush is here.  We’re in his district. Attorney General and formerseatmate of mine when I was in the state senate, Lisa Madigan. County Board President --used to be my alderwoman -- Tony Preckwinkle in the house.
  
And I’ve got -- I see a lot of reverend clergy here, but I’m not going to mention them,because if I miss one I’m in trouble.  They’re all friends of mine. They’ve been knowing me.
Some people may not know this, but obviously, this is my old neighborhood. I used to teachright around the corner. This is where Michelle and I met, where we fell in love --
Audience: Aww --
President Obama: This is where we raised our daughters, in a house just about a mile awayfrom here -- less than a mile. And that’s really what I’ve come here to talk about today --raising our kids.
Audience: We love you!
President Obama: I love you, too.  I love you, too.
I’m here to make sure that we talk about and then work towards giving every child everychance in life; building stronger communities and new ladders of opportunity that they canclimb into the middle class and beyond; and, most importantly, keeping them safe from harm.
Michelle was born and raised here -- a proud daughter of the South Side.  Last weekend, shecame home, but it was to attend the funeral of Hadiya Pendleton. And Hadiya’s parents, bythe way, are here -- and I want to just acknowledge them. They are just wonderful, wonderfulpeople.
And as you know, this week, in my State of the Union, I talked about Hadiya on Tuesday nightand the fact that unfortunately what happened to Hadiya is not unique. It's not unique toChicago. It's not unique to this country. Too many of our children are being taken away fromus.
Two months ago, America mourned 26 innocent first-graders and their educators in Newtown.And today, I had the high honor of giving the highest civilian award I can give to the parent --or the families of the educators who had been killed in Newtown. And there was somethingprofound and uniquely heartbreaking and tragic, obviously, about a group of 6-year-olds beingkilled. But last year, there were 443 murders with a firearm on the streets of this city, and 65of those victims were 18 and under. So that’s the equivalent of a Newtown every four months.
And that’s precisely why the overwhelming majority of Americans are asking for somecommon-sense proposals to make it harder for criminals to get their hands on a gun. And as Isaid on Tuesday night, I recognize not everybody agrees with every issue. There are regionaldifferences. The experience of gun ownership is different in urban areas than it is in ruralareas, different from upstate and downstate Illinois.
  
But these proposals deserve a vote in Congress. They deserve a vote.  They deserve a vote.And I want to thank those members of Congress who are working together in a serious way totry to address this issue.
But I’ve also said no law or set of laws can prevent every senseless act of violence in thiscountry. When a child opens fire on another child, there’s a hole in that child’s heart thatgovernment can't fill -- only community and parents and teachers and clergy can fill that hole.In too many neighborhoods today -- whether here in Chicago or the farthest reaches of ruralAmerica -- it can feel like for a lot of young people the future only extends to the next streetcorner or the outskirts of town; that no matter how much you work or how hard you try, yourdestiny was determined the moment you were born. There are entire neighborhoods whereyoung people, they don’t see an example of somebody succeeding. And for a lot of youngboys and young men, in particular, they don’t see an example of fathers or grandfathers,uncles, who are in a position to support families and be held up and respected.
And so that means that this is not just a gun issue. It’s also an issue of the kinds ofcommunities that we’re building. And for that, we all share a responsibility, as citizens, to fixit. We all share a responsibility to move this country closer to our founding vision that nomatter who you are, or where you come from, here in America, you can decide your owndestiny. You can succeed if you work hard and fulfill your responsibilities.
Now, that means we’ve got to grow our economy and create more good jobs. It means we’vegot to equip every American with the skills and the training to fill those jobs. And it meanswe’ve got to rebuild ladders of opportunity for everybody willing to climb them.
Now, that starts at home. There’s no more important ingredient for success, nothing thatwould be more important for us reducing violence than strong, stable families -- which meanswe should do more to promote marriage and encourage fatherhood.  Don’t get me wrong -- asthe son of a single mom, who gave everything she had to raise me with the help of mygrandparents, I turned out okay.  But -- no, no, but I think it’s -- so we’ve got single momsout here, they’re heroic in what they’re doing and we are so proud of them.  But at the sametime, I wish I had had a father who was around and involved. Loving, supportive parents --and, by the way, that’s all kinds of parents -- that includes foster parents, and that includesgrandparents, and extended families; it includes gay or straight parents.
Those parents supporting kids -- that’s the single most important thing. Unconditional love foryour child -- that makes a difference. If a child grows up with parents who have work, andhave some education, and can be role models, and can teach integrity and responsibility, anddiscipline and delayed gratification -- all those things give a child the kind of foundation thatallows them to say, my future, I can make it what I want. And we’ve got to make sure thatevery child has that, and in some cases, we may have to fill the gap and the void if childrendon’t have that.
  
So we should encourage marriage by removing the financial disincentives for couples who loveone another but may find it financially disadvantageous if they get married. We should reformour child support laws to get more men working and engaged with their children.  And myAdministration will continue to work with the faith community and the private sector this yearon a campaign to encourage strong parenting and fatherhood. Because what makes you aman is not the ability to make a child, it’s the courage to raise one.
We also know, though, that there is no surer path to success in the middle class than a goodeducation. And what we now know is that that has to begin in the earliest years. Study afterstudy shows that the earlier a child starts learning, the more likely they are to succeed -- themore likely they are to do well at Hyde Park Academy; the more likely they are to graduate;the more likely they are to get a good job; the more likely they are to form stable families andthen be able to raise children themselves who get off to a good start.
Chicago already has a competition, thanks to what the Mayor is doing, that rewards the bestpreschools in the city -- so Rahm has already prioritized this. But what I’ve also done is say,let’s give every child across America access to high-quality, public preschool. Every child, notjust some.  Every dollar we put into early childhood education can save $7 down the road byboosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, reducing violent crime, reducing thewelfare rolls, making sure that folks who have work, now they’re paying taxes. All this stuffpays back huge dividends if we make the investment. So let’s make this happen. Let’s makesure every child has the chance they deserve.
As kids go through school, we’ll recruit new math and science teachers to make sure thatthey’ve got the skills that the future demands. We’ll help more young people in low-incomeneighborhoods get summer jobs. We’ll redesign our high schools and encourage our kids tostay in high school, so that the diploma they get leads directly to a good job once theygraduate.
Right here in Chicago, five new high schools have partnered with companies and communitycolleges to prepare our kids with the skills that businesses are looking for right now. And yourCollege to Careers program helps community college students get access to the same kinds ofreal-world experiences. So we know what works. Let’s just do it in more places. Let’s reachmore young people. Let’s give more kids a chance.
So we know how important families are. We know how important education is. We recognizethat government alone can’t solve these problems of violence and poverty, that everybodyhas to be involved. But we also have to remember that the broader economic environment ofcommunities is critical as well. For example, we need to make sure that folks who are workingnow, often in the hardest jobs, see their work rewarded with wages that allow them to raise afamily without falling into poverty.
  
Today, a family with two kids that works hard and relies on a minimum wage salary still livesbelow the poverty line. That’s wrong, and we should fix it. We should reward an honest day’swork with honest wages. And that's why we should raise the minimum wage to $9 an hourand make it a wage you can live on.
And even though some cities have bounced back pretty quickly from the recession, we knowthat there are communities and neighborhoods within cities or in small towns that haven’tbounced back. Cities like Chicago are ringed with former factory towns that never came backall the way from plants packing up; there are pockets of poverty where young adults are stilllooking for their first job.
And that’s why on Tuesday I announced -- and that's part of what I want to focus on here inChicago and across the country -- is my intention to partner with 20 of the hardest-hitcommunities in America to get them back in the game -- get them back in the game.
First, we’ll work with local leaders to cut through red tape and improve things like publicsafety and education and housing. And we’ll bring all the resources to bear in a coordinatedfashion so that we can get that tipping point where suddenly a community starts feeling likethings are changing and we can come back.
Second of all, if you’re willing to play a role in a child’s education, then we’ll help you reformyour schools. We want to seed more and more partnerships of the kind that Rahm is trying toset up.
Third, we’re going to help bring jobs and growth to hard-hit neighborhoods by giving taxbreaks to business owners who invest and hire in those neighborhoods.
Fourth, and specific to the issue of violence -- because it’s very hard to develop economicallyif people don't feel safe. If they don't feel like they can walk down the street and shop at astore without getting hit over head or worse, then commerce dries up, businesses don't wantto locate, families move out, you get into the wrong cycle. So we’re going to targetneighborhoods struggling to deal with violent crime and help them reduce that violence inways that have been proven to work. And I know this is a priority of your Mayor’s; it’s goingto be a priority of mine.
And finally, we’re going to keep working in communities all across the country, including herein Chicago, to replace run-down public housing that doesn’t offer much hope or safety withnew, healthy homes for low- and moderate-income families.
And here in Woodlawn, you’ve seen some of the progress that we can make when we cometogether to rebuild our neighborhoods, and attract new businesses, and improve our schools.Woodlawn is not all the way where it needs to be, but thanks to wonderful institutions likeApostolic Church, we’ve made great progress.
  
So we want to help more communities follow your example. And let’s go even farther byoffering incentives to companies that hire unemployed Americans who have got what it takesto fill a job opening, but they may have been out of work so long that nobody is willing to givethem a chance right now. Let’s put our people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in needof repair. Young people can get experience -- apprenticeships, learn a trade. And we’reremoving blight from our community.
If we gather together what works, we can extend more ladders of opportunity for anybodywho’s working to build a strong, middle-class life for themselves. Because in America, yourdestiny shouldn’t be determined by where you live, where you were born. It should bedetermined by how big you’re willing to dream, how much effort and sweat and tears you’rewilling to put in to realizing that dream.
When I first moved to Chicago -- before any of the students in this room were born -- and awhole lot of people who are in the audience remember me from those days, I lived in acommunity on the South Side right up the block, but I also worked further south wherecommunities had been devastated by some of the steel plants closing. And my job was towork with churches and laypeople and local leaders to rebuild neighborhoods, and improveschools, and help young people who felt like they had nowhere to turn.
And those of you who worked with me, Reverend Love, you remember, it wasn’t easy.Progress didn’t come quickly. Sometimes I got so discouraged I thought about just giving up.But what kept me going was the belief that with enough determination and effort andpersistence and perseverance, change is always possible; that we may not be able to helpeverybody, but if we help a few then that propels progress forward. We may not be able tosave every child from gun violence, but if we save a few, that starts changing the atmospherein our communities.  We may not be able to get everybody a job right away, but if we get afew folks a job, then everybody starts feeling a little more hopeful and a little moreencouraged.  Neighborhood by neighborhood, one block by one block, one family at a time.
Now, this is what I had a chance to talk about when I met with some young men from HydePark Academy who were participating in this B.A.M. program. Where are the guys I talked to?Stand up you all, so we can all see you guys.  So these are some -- these are all someexceptional young men, and I couldn't be prouder of them. And the reason I'm proud of themis because a lot of them have had some issues. That's part of the reason why you guys are inthe program.
But what I explained to them was I had issues too when I was their age. I just had anenvironment that was a little more forgiving. So when I screwed up, the consequencesweren't as high as when kids on the South Side screw up.  So I had more of a safety net. Butthese guys are no different than me, and we had that conversation about what does it take tochange. And the same thing that it takes for us individually to change, I said to them, well,that's what it takes for communities to change. That's what it takes for countries to change.It's not easy.
  
But it does require us, first of all, having a vision about where we want to be. It requires usrecognizing that it will be hard work getting there. It requires us being able to overcome andpersevere in the face of roadblocks and disappointments and failures. It requires us reflectinginternally about who we are and what we believe in, and facing up to our own fears andinsecurities, and admitting when we're wrong. And that same thing that we have to do in ourindividual lives that these guys talked about, that's what we have to do for our communities.And it will not be easy, but it can be done.  
When Hadiya Pendleton and her classmates visited Washington three weeks ago, they spenttime visiting the monuments -- including the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial just off theNational Mall. And that memorial stands as a tribute to everything Dr. King achieved in hislifetime. But it also reminds us of how hard that work was and how many disappointments heexperienced. He was here in Chicago fighting poverty, and just like a lot of us, there weretimes where he felt like he was losing hope. So in some ways, that memorial is a testamentnot to work that's completed, but it’s a testament to the work that remains unfinished.
His goal was to free us not only from the shackles of discrimination, but from the shadow ofpoverty that haunts too many of our communities, the self-destructive impulses, and themindless violence that claims so many lives of so many innocent young people. 
These are difficult challenges. No solution we offer will be perfect. But perfection has neverbeen our goal. Our goal has been to try and make whatever difference we can. Our goal hasbeen to engage in the hard but necessary work of bringing America one step closer to thenation we know we can be.
If we do that, if we’re striving with every fiber of our being to strengthen our middle class, toextend ladders of opportunity for everybody who is trying as hard as they can to create abetter life for themselves; if we do everything in our power to keep our children safe fromharm; if we’re fulfilling our obligations to one another and to future generations; if we makethat effort, then I’m confident -- I’m confident that we will write the next great chapter in ourAmerican story. I’m not going to be able to do it by myself, though. Nobody can. We’re goingto have to do it together.
Thank you, everybody.
God bless you.
God bless the United States of America.
