Hello, everybody.  I am glad to see that all of you braved the weather to be here.  A little while ago I had ameeting with the Democratic and Republican congressional leaders, and it went very well.  In fact, Iunderstand that McConnell and Reid are out doing snow angels on the South Lawn together.  Can youpicture that, Chuck?  Not really?
The meeting did go well, and I appreciate them making the trek.  We had a good and frank conversation andit's one that I hope we can continue on a more regular basis.
We all understand that there are legitimate and genuine differences between the parties, but despite thepolitical posturing that often paralyzes this town, there are many issues upon which we can and shouldagree.  That's what the American people are demanding of us.  I think they're tired of every day beingElection Day in Washington.  And at this critical time in our country, the people sent us here expect aseriousness of purpose that transcends petty politics.
That's why I'm going to continue to seek the best ideas from either party as we work to tackle the pressingchallenges ahead.  I am confident, for example, that when one in 10 of our fellow citizens can't work, weshould be able to come together and help business create more jobs.  We ought to be able to agree onproviding small businesses with additional tax credits and much needed lines of credit.  We ought to agreeon investments in crumbling roads and bridges, and we should agree on tax breaks for making homes moreenergy-efficient -- all of which will put more Americans to work.

Many of the job proposals that I've laid out have passed the House and are soon going to be debated in theSenate.  We spent a lot of time in this meeting discussing a jobs package and how we could move forwardon that.  And if there are additional ideas, I will consider them as well.  What I won't consider is doingnothing in the face of a lot of hardship across the country. 
We also talked about restoring fiscal responsibility.  There are few matters on which there is as muchvigorous bipartisan agreement, at least in public, but unfortunately there's also a lot of partisan wranglingbehind closed doors.  This is what we know for sure:  For us to solve this extraordinary problem that is somany years in the making, it's going to take the cooperation of both parties.  It's not going to happen in anyother way.
I'm pleased that Congress supported my request to restore the pay-as-you-go rule, which was instrumentalin turning deficits into surpluses during the 1990s.  I've also called for a bipartisan fiscal commission. Unfortunately this measure, which originally had received the support of a bipartisan majority of the Senateand was cosponsored by Senators Conrad and Gregg, Democrats and Republicans, was blocked there.  SoI'm going to be creating this commission by executive order.  And during our meeting I asked the leadershipof both parties to join in this serious effort to address our long-term deficits, because when the politics is putaside, the reality of our fiscal challenge is not subject to interpretation.  Math is not partisan.  There ought tobe a debate about how to close our deficits.  What we can't accept is business as usual, and we can't affordgrandstanding at the expense of actually getting something done.
During our meeting we also touched briefly on how we can move forward on health reform.  I've alreadyannounced that in two weeks I'll be holding a meeting with people from both parties, and as I told thecongressional leadership, I'm looking forward to a constructive debate with plans that need to be measuredagainst this test.  Does it bring down costs for all Americans as well as for the federal government, whichspends a huge amount on health care?  Does it provide adequate protection against abuses by theinsurance industry?  Does it make coverage affordable and available to the tens of millions of workingAmericans who don't have it right now?  And does it help us get on a path of fiscal sustainability?
We also talked about why this is so urgent.  Just this week, there was a report that Anthem Blue Cross,which is the largest insurer in the largest state, California, is planning on raising premiums for manyindividual policyholders by as much as 39 percent.  If we don't act, this is just a preview of comingattractions.  Premiums will continue to rise for folks with insurance; millions more will lose their coveragealtogether; our deficits will continue to grow larger.  And we have an obligation -- both parties -- to tackle thisissue in a serious way. 
Now, bipartisanship depends on a willingness among both Democrats and Republicans to put aside mattersof party for the good of the country.  I won't hesitate to embrace a good idea from my friends in the minorityparty, but I also won't hesitate to condemn what I consider to be obstinacy that's rooted not in substantivedisagreements but in political expedience.  We talked about this as well, particularly when it comes to theconfirmation process.  I respect the Senate's role to advise and consent, but for months, qualified, non-controversial nominees for critical positions in government, often positions related to our national security,have been held up despite having overwhelming support.  My nominee for one important job, the head ofGeneral Services Administration, which helps run the government, was denied a vote for nine months. When she finally got a vote on her nomination, she was confirmed 96 to nothing.  That's not advise andconsent; that's delay and obstruct.

One senator, as you all are aware, had put a hold on every single nominee that we had put forward due to adispute over a couple of earmarks in his state.  In our meeting, I asked the congressional leadership to put astop to these holds in which nominees for critical jobs are denied a vote for months.  Surely we can setaside partisanship and do what's traditionally been done to confirm these nominations.  If the Senate doesnot act -- and I made this very clear -- if the Senate does not act to confirm these nominees, I will considermaking several recess appointments during the upcoming recess, because we can't afford to allow politicsto stand in the way of a well-functioning government.
My hope is that this will be the first of a series of meetings that I have with leadership of both parties inCongress.  We've got to get past the tired debates that have plagued our politics and left behind nothing butsoaring debt and mounting challenges, greater hardships among the American people, and extraordinaryfrustrations among the American people.  Those frustrations are what led me to run for President, and aslong as I'm here in Washington, I intend to try to make this government work on their behalf.
So, you know, I'm going to take a couple of questions, guys.
Major.
Question:  After meeting with you, John Boehner came out and told us, "The House can't pass the healthcare bill it once passed; the Senate can't pass the health care bill it once passed.  Why would we have aconversation about legislation that can't pass?"  As a part of that, he said you and your White House andcongressional Democrats should start over entirely from scratch on health care reform.  How do yourespond?  Are you willing to do that?
President Obama:  Well, here's how I responded to John in the meeting, and I've said this publicly before. There are some core goals that have to be met.  We've got to control costs, both for families andbusinesses, but also for our government.  Everybody out there who talks about deficits has to acknowledgethat the single biggest driver of our deficits is health care spending.  We cannot deal with our deficits anddebt long term unless we get a handle on that.  So that has to be part of a package.
Number two, we've got to deal with insurance abuses that affect millions of Americans who've got healthinsurance.  And number three, we've got to make health insurance more available to folks in the individualmarket, as I just mentioned, in California, who are suddenly seeing their premiums go up 39 percent.  Thatapplies to the majority of small businesses, as well as sole proprietors.  They are struggling.
So I've got these goals.  Now, we have a package, as we work through the differences between the Houseand the Senate, and we'll put it up on a Web site for all to see over a long period of time, that meets thosecriteria, meets those goals.  But when I was in Baltimore talking to the House Republicans, they indicated,we can accomplish some of these goals at no cost.  And I said, great, let me see it.  And I have no interestin doing something that's more expensive and harder to accomplish if somebody else has an easier way todo it. 
So I'm going to be starting from scratch in the sense that I will be open to any ideas that help promote thesegoals.

What I will not do, what I don't think makes sense and I don't think the American people want to see, wouldbe another year of partisan wrangling around these issues; another six months or eight months or ninemonths worth of hearings in every single committee in the House and the Senate in which there's a lot ofposturing.  Let's get the relevant parties together; let's put the best ideas on the table.  My hope is that wecan find enough overlap that we can say this is the right way to move forward, even if I don't get everysingle thing that I want.
But here's the point that I made to John Boehner and Mitch McConnell:  Bipartisanship can't be that I agreeto all the things that they believe in or want, and they agree to none of the things I believe in and want, andthat's the price of bipartisanship, right?  But that's sometimes the way it gets presented.  Mitch McConnellsaid something very nice in the meeting about how he supports our goals on nuclear energy and clean coaltechnology and more drilling to increase oil production.  Well, of course he likes that; that's part of theRepublican agenda for energy, which I accept.  And I'm willing to move off some of the preferences of myparty in order to meet them halfway.  But there's got to be some give from their side as well.  That's true onhealth care; that's true on energy; that's true on financial reform.  That's what I'm hoping gets accomplishedat the summit.
Question:  Do you agree the House and Senate bill can't pass anymore?
President Obama:  What I agree with is that the public has soured on the process that they saw over thelast year.  I think that actually contaminates how they view the substance of the bills.  I think it is importantfor all of these issues to be aired so that people have confidence if we're moving forward on such asignificant part of the economy as health care, that there is complete transparency and all of these issueshave been adequately vetted and adequately debated.
And this gives an opportunity not just for Democrats to say here's what we think we should do, but it alsogives Republicans a showcase before the entire country to say here's our plan; here's why we think this willwork.  And one of the things that John Boehner and Mitch McConnell both said is they didn't think that thestatus quo was acceptable, and that's, right there, promising.  That indicates that if all sides agree that wecan't just continue with business as usual then maybe we can actually get something done.
Question:   Mr. President, one of the reasons Anthem said -- Anthem Blue Cross says that it's raising itspremiums is because so many people are dropping out of individual coverage because the economy is sobad and that leaves the people in the pool who are people who need medical care driving up costs.  One ofthe reasons why businesses are not expanding right now, in addition to some of the credit issues you'vetalked about, at least according to business leaders, is they say there's an uncertainty of what they need toplan for because of the energy bill, because of health care.  That's what they say.  I'm not saying it's true ornot, but that's what they say.  What do you say when you hear that?
President Obama:  Well, I think that the biggest uncertainty has been we just went through the worstrecession since the Great Depression and people weren't sure whether the financial system was going tomelt down and whether we were going to tip into a endless recession.  So let's be clear about the sources ofuncertainty in terms of business investment over the last several years:  A huge contraction, trillions ofdollars of losses in people's 401(k)s; people have a lot of debt coming out of the previous decade that theystill haven't worked out; the housing market losing a whole bunch of value.

So the good news is that where we were contracting by 6 percent the economy is now growing by 6percent.  The CEOs I talked to are saying they are now making investments, and I anticipate that they'regoing to start hiring at a more rapid clip.  What I've also heard is them saying that we would like to feel likeWashington is working and able to get some things done.   There are two ways of interpreting the issue of uncertainty.  One way would be to say, well, you know what,we'll just go back to what we were doing before on, let's say, the financial markets.  We won't have theregulations that we need; we won't make any changes in terms of "too big to fail."  That will provide certainty-- until the next financial crisis. 
That's not the kind of certainty I think that the financial markets need.  The kind of certainty they need is forus to go ahead and agree on a bipartisan effort to put some rules of the road in place so that consumers areprotected in the financial markets; so that we don't have banks that are too big to fail; that we have ways ofwinding them down and protecting the overall system without taxpayer bailouts.  That requires legislation. The sooner we can get that done, the better.
The same would be true when it comes to health care.  A lot of CEOs I hear from will say, boy, we'd like youto get health care settled one way or another, but they will acknowledge that when they open up their latestinvoice for their premiums and they find out that those premiums have gone up 20 percent or 25 percent,that's the kind of uncertainty that also tamps down business investment.
So I guess my answer would be this:  The sooner the business community has a sense that we've got ouract together here in Washington and can move forward on big, serious issues in a substantive way without alot of posturing and partisan wrangling, I think the better off the entire country is going to be.  I absolutelyagree on that.
What I think is important is not to buy into this notion that is perpetrated by some of the business intereststhat got a stake in this who are fighting financial reform, for example, to say, boy, we'd be doing fine if wejust didn't try to regulate the banks.  That I think would be a mistake.
Question:   Just to play devil's advocate on that -- a small business, let's say, not somebody who's going tobe affected by the regulatory reform, small business -- you have proposed, you would acknowledge, a boldagenda.  And a small business might wonder, I don't know how the energy bill is going to affect me, I don'tknow how the health care reform bill is going to affect me -- I'd better hold off on hiring.
President Obama:  The small businesses I talk to -- and I've been talking to a lot of them as I've beentraveling around the country over the last several months -- their biggest problem is right now they can't getcredit out of their banks so they're uncertain about that.  And they're still uncertain about orders -- do theyjust have enough customers to justify them doing more.
It's looking better at this point.  But that's not the rationale for people saying, I'm not hiring.  Let me put it thisway.  Most small businesses right now, if they've got enough customers to make a profit and they can getthe bank loans required to boost their payroll, boost their inventory, and sell to those customers, they will doso.  Okay?
Let's see, let's get a print guy here.  David.

Question:  You heard McConnell talk about nuclear power, offshore drilling, free trade -- that's a lot ofRepublican stuff.  Is your party going to go for that if you decide to support that --
President Obama:  You know, I think that on energy there should be a bipartisan agreement that we haveto take a both/and approach rather than an either/or approach.  What do I mean by that? I am very firm inmy conviction that the country that leads the way in clean energy -- solar, wind, biodiesel, geothermal -- thatcountry is going to win the race in the 21st century global economy.  So we have to move in that direction.
What is also true is that given our energy needs in order to continue economic growth, produce jobs, makesure our businesses are competitive around the world, that we're going to need some of the old, traditionalenergy sources as we're developing these new ones and ramping them up.  So we can't overnight convertto an all-solar or an all-wind economy.  That just can't happen.  We're going to have needs in thesetraditional sources.
And so the question then is, are we going to be able to put together a package that includes safe, securenuclear power; that includes new technologies so that we can use coal -- which we have in abundance andis very cheap, but often is adding to our greenhouse gases -- can we find sequestration technologies thatclean that up; can we identify opportunities to increase our oil and natural gas production in a way that isenvironmentally sustainable?  And that should be part of a package with our development of clean energy.
And my hope is that my Republican friends, but also Democrats, say to themselves, let's be practical andlet's do both.  Let's not just do one or the other; let's do both.  Over time I think the transition is going to bemore and more clean energy and over time fossil fuels become less prominent in our overall energy mix. But we've got to do both.
Question:   How confident are you there will be that kind of consensus for that double-edged approach?
President Obama:  I am just a eternal optimist -- and so -- it's the right thing to do.  And all I can do is justto keep on making the argument about what's right for the country and assume that over time people,regardless of party, regardless of their particular political positions, are going to gravitate towards the truth. Okay?
I'm going to take two more.  Let's see --
Question:   How about the back? 
President Obama:  Well, I just want to make sure that I was getting a balance here, so -- go ahead, Chuck.
Question:   Awwww --
President Obama:  Why is everybody moaning about Todd?
Question:   He's too good.  His questions are too precise.

Question:   Iran -- we got the news today that they're doing more of these -- trying to enhance this uraniumeven more.  Obviously Secretary Gates today in Paris was quoted as saying basically the dialogue seems tobe over and now the question is sanctions.  Where are we on sanctions?  How close is this?  I know youhad sort of an end-of-the-year deadline when you stood up there with Sarkozy and Brown.  It's nowFebruary.  How quickly is this moving along?
President Obama:  Well, it's moving along fairly quickly.  I think that we have bent over backwards to say tothe Islamic Republic of Iran that we are willing to have a constructive conversation about how they can alignthemselves with international norms and rules and reenter as full members of the international community.
The most obvious attempt was when we gave them an offer that said we are going to provide theconversion of some of the low-enriched uranium that they already have into the isotopes that they need fortheir medical research and for hospitals that would serve up to a million Iranian citizens.  They rejected it --although one of the difficulties in dealing with Iran over the last several months is it's not always clear who'sspeaking on behalf of the government, and we get a lot of different, mixed signals.  But what's clear is, isthat they have not said yes to an agreement that Russia, China, Germany, France, Great Britain and theUnited States all said was a good deal, and that the director of the IAEA said was the right thing to do andthat Iran should accept.
That indicates to us that, despite their posturing that their nuclear power is only for civilian use, that they infact continue to pursue a course that would lead to weaponization.  And that is not acceptable to theinternational community, not just to the United States.  So what we've said from the start was we're movingon dual tracks.  If you want to accept the kinds of agreements with the international community that lead youdown a path of being a member of good standing, then we welcome you.  If not --
Question:   Haven't they responded, though?  I mean, by deciding to do what they did, with these --
President Obama:  Well, I'm getting to that. 
Question:   Okay.
President Obama:  And if not, then the next step is sanctions.  They have made their choice so far,although the door is still open.  And what we are going to be working on over the next several weeks isdeveloping a significant regime of sanctions that will indicate to them how isolated they are from theinternational community as a whole.
Question:   What do you mean by “regime of sanctions”?
President Obama:  Well, meaning that there's going to be a --
Question:   Some will be U.N. and some will be --
President Obama:  We are going to be looking at a variety of ways in which countries indicate to Iran thattheir approach is unacceptable.  And the U.N. will be one aspect of that broader effort.

Question:   China will be there?  You're confident?
President Obama:  Well, the -- we are confident right now that the international community is unifiedaround Iran's misbehavior in this area.  How China operates at the Security Council as we pursue sanctionsis something that we're going to have to see.  One thing I'm pleased about is to see how forward-leaning theRussians have been on this issue.  I think they clearly have seen that Iran hasn't been serious about solvingwhat is a solvable dispute between Iran and the international community.
All right?  I'm going to make this the last question.  And I'll take somebody from the back -- yes.
Question:  Me?
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:   Thanks for doing this.  It's been a while.  On health care, the Republicans are asking whetherthe February 25th session will include economists and public interest groups and people supporting yourside, or will it just be the members of Congress?  And on Anthem Blue Cross, do you have the authority togo in and tell a private company they can't charge that -- how will you stop them?
President Obama:  Well, I don't have the authority as I understand it -- I can't simply issue an executiveorder lowering everybody's rates.  If I could I would have done that already and saved myself a lot of griefon Capitol Hill.  That's why reform is so important.  That's why the status quo is unacceptable. 
But there is no shortcut in dealing with this issue.  I know the American people get frustrated in debatingsomething like health care because you get a whole bunch of different claims being made by differentgroups and different interests.  It is a big, complicated, tough issue.  But what is also true is that withoutsome action on the part of Congress, it is very unlikely that we see any improvement over the currenttrajectory.  And the current trajectory is premiums keep on going up 10, 15, 20, 30 percent.  The currenttrajectory is more and more people are losing health care.
I don't know if people noted, because during the health care debate everybody was saying the President istrying to take over -- a government takeover of health care.  I don't know if anybody noticed that for the firsttime this year you saw more people getting health care from government than you did from the privatesector -- not because of anything we did, but because more and more people are losing their health carefrom their employers.  It's becoming unaffordable.  That's what we're trying to prevent. 
We want people to be able to get health care from their employers.  But we also understand that you've gotto fix the system so that people are able to get it at affordable rates and small businesses can afford to givetheir employees insurance at an affordable rate.  And that's not happening right now.
To your question about the 25th, my hope is that this doesn't end up being political theater, as I think someof you have phrased it.  I want a substantive discussion.  We haven't refined exactly how the agenda isgoing to go that day.  We want to talk with both the Democratic and Republican leaders to find out what theythink would be most useful.  I do want to make sure that there's some people like the Congressional BudgetOffice, for example, that are considered non-partisan, who can answer questions.

In this whole health care debate I'm reminded of the story that was told about Senator Moynihan, who was Iguess in an argument with one of his colleagues, and his colleague was losing the argument so he got alittle flustered and said to Senator Moynihan, "Well, I'm entitled to my own opinion."  And Senator Moynihansaid, "Well, you're entitled to your own opinion, but you're not entitled to your own facts."  I think that's thekey to a successful dialogue on the 25th or on health care.
Let's establish some common facts.  Let's establish what the issues are, what the problems are, and let'stest out in front of the American people what ideas work and what ideas don't.  And if we can establish thatfactual accuracy about how different approaches would work, then I think we can make some progress. And it may be that some of the facts that come up are ones that make my party a little bit uncomfortable.  Soif it's established that by working seriously on medical malpractice and tort reform that we can reduce someof those costs, I've said from the beginning of this debate I'd be willing to work on that.  On the other hand, ifI'm told that that is only a fraction of the problem and that is not the biggest driver of health care costs, thenI'm also going to insist, okay, let's look at that as one aspect of it, but what else are we willing to do?
And this is where it gets back to the point I was making earlier.  Bipartisanship cannot mean simply thatDemocrats give up everything that they believe in, find the handful of things that Republicans have beenadvocating for and we do those things, and then we have bipartisanship.  That's not how it works in anyother realm of life.  That's certainly not how it works in my marriage with Michelle, although I usually do givein most of the time.  But the -- there's got to be some give and take, and that's what I'm hoping can beaccomplished.  And I'm confident that's what the American people are looking for.
So, all right? 
Question:   Jobs question? 
President Obama:  Okay, since there wasn't a jobs question --
Question:   Well, I just --
President Obama:  I'll make this the last one, jobs question.
Question:   At the stakeout, the Republicans were saying, well, the jobs package we've seen, it's not reallyready yet, we're a little worried about the cost.  Are you satisfied that there is something that can be quicklymoved through Congress on jobs?
President Obama:  Well, my understanding is -- first of all, the House has moved forward a jobs packagethat has some good elements in it.  My understanding is, is that there is bipartisan talks taking place as wespeak on the Senate side about some elements of a package.
I think there are some things that a lot of people agree on.  Just to give you an example, the idea ofeliminating capital gains for small businesses -- something we can all agree on.  I talked about it at the Stateof the Union address.  My hope would be that we would all agree on a mechanism to get community bankswho are lending to small businesses more capital, because that is something that I keep on hearing is oneof the biggest problems that small businesses have out there.

So I think that it's realistic for us to get a package moving quickly that may not include all the things I thinkneed to be done, and it may be that that first package builds some trust and confidence that Democrats andRepublicans on Capitol Hill can work together and then we move on to the next aspect of the package andso forth.  It may take a series of incremental steps, but the one thing I'm absolutely clear about is, is thatwe've got an economy that's growing right now, a huge boost in productivity -- that's the good news.  Thebad news is, is that companies still haven't taken that final step in actually putting people on their payroll full-
time.
We're seeing an increase in temporary workers, but they haven't yet taken on that full-time worker.  And soproviding some additional impetus to them, right as the economy is moving in a positive direction, I think canend up yielding some good results.
All right?  Thank you, guys.  That was pretty good, thanks.