Thank you, Governor, for that powerful message, but more importantly, for being here withand for your people every step of the way.
We are grateful to you, to Reverend Gariss, Father Monaghan. I’m so glad you got in thattub. To Reverend Brown for that incredibly powerful message.
To Senator Claire McCaskill, who’s been here, and Congressman Billy Long; Mayor Woolston.To Craig Fugate. It doesn’t get a lot of attention, but he heads up FEMA, our emergencyresponse at the federal level. He’s been going from Tuscaloosa to Joplin and everywhere inbetween tirelessly doing outstanding work. We’re grateful for him. Gail McGovern, thePresident of the National Red Cross, which has contributed mightily to the rebuilding effortshere.
Most of all, to the family and friends of all those who’ve been lost and all those who’ve beenaffected.
Today we gather to celebrate the lives of those we’ve lost to the storms here in Joplin andacross the Midwest, to keep in our prayers those still missing, to mourn with their families, tostand together during this time of pain and trial.
And as Reverend Brown alluded to, the question that weighs on us at a time like thisis: Why? Why our town? Why our home? Why my son, or husband, or wife, or sister, orfriend? Why?
  
We do not have the capacity to answer. We can’t know when a terrible storm will strike, orwhere, or the severity of the devastation that it may cause. We can’t know why we’re testedwith the loss of a loved one, or the loss of a home where we’ve lived a lifetime.
These things are beyond our power to control. But that does not mean we are powerless inthe face of adversity. How we respond when the storm strikes is up to us. How we live in theaftermath of tragedy and heartache, that’s within our control. And it’s in these moments,through our actions, that we often see the glimpse of what makes life worth living in the firstplace.
In the last week, that’s what Joplin has not just taught Missouri, not just taught America, buthas taught the world. I was overseas in the aftermath of the storm, and had world leaderscoming up to me saying, let the people of Joplin know we are with them; we’re thinking aboutthem; we love them.
Because the world saw how Joplin responded. A university turned itself into a makeshifthospital. Some of you used your pickup trucks as ambulances, carrying the injured -- on doorsthat served as stretchers. Your restaurants have rushed food to people in need. Businesseshave filled trucks with donations. You’ve waited in line for hours to donate blood to people youknow, but also to people you’ve never met.  And in all this, you have lived the words ofScripture:
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed;we are perplexed, but not in despair;Persecuted, but not forsaken;cast down, but not destroyed....
As the governor said, you have shown the world what it means to love thy neighbor. You’vebanded together. You’ve come to each other’s aid. You’ve demonstrated a simple truth: thatamid heartbreak and tragedy, no one is a stranger. Everybody is a brother. Everybody is asister. We can all love one another.
As you move forward in the days ahead, I know that rebuilding what you’ve lost won’t beeasy. I just walked through some of the neighborhoods that have been affected, and you lookout at the landscape, and there have to be moments where you just say, where to begin? Howto start? There are going to be moments where after the shock has worn off, you feelalone. But there’s no doubt in my mind what the people of this community can do. There’s nodoubt in my mind that Joplin will rebuild.  And as President, I can promise you your countrywill be there with you every single step of the way. We will be with you every step of theway. We’re not going anywhere. The cameras may leave. The spotlight may shift. But we willbe with you every step of the way until Joplin is restored and this community is back on itsfeet. We’re not going anywhere.
  
That is not just my promise; that’s America’s promise. It’s a promise I make here in Joplin;it’s a promise I made down in Tuscaloosa, or in any of the communities that have been hit bythese devastating storms over the last few weeks.
Now, there have been countless acts of kindness and selflessness in recent days.  We’vealready heard the record of some of that. But perhaps none are as inspiring as what tookplace when the storm was bearing down on Joplin, threatening an entire community with utterdestruction. And in the face of winds that showed no mercy, no regard for human life, that didnot discriminate by race or faith or background, it was ordinary people, swiftly tested, whosaid, “I’m willing to die right now so that someone else might live.”
It was the husband who threw himself over his wife as their house came apart around them. It was the mother who shielded her young son. It was Dean Wells, a husband and father who loved to sing and whistle in his churchchoir. Dean was working a shift at the Home Depot, managing the electrical department,when the siren rang out. He sprang into action, moving people to safety. Over and over again,he went back for others, until a wall came down on top of him.  In the end, most of thebuilding was destroyed, but not where Dean had directed his coworkers and his customers. There was a young man named Christopher Lucas who was 26 years old. Father of twodaughters; third daughter on the way. Just like any other night, Christopher was doing his jobas manager on duty at Pizza Hut. And then he heard the storm coming.
It was then when this former sailor quickly ushered everybody into the walk-in freezer. Theonly problem was, the freezer door wouldn’t stay closed from the inside. So as the tornadobore down on this small storefront on Range Line Road, Christopher left the freezer to find arope or a cord or anything to hold the door shut. He made it back just in time, tying a piece ofbungee cord to the handle outside, wrapping the other end around his arm, holding the doorclosed with all his might.  And Christopher held it as long as he could, until he was pulled away by the incredible force ofthe storm. He died saving more than a dozen people in that freezer.
You see, there are heroes all around us, all the time. They walk by us on the sidewalk, andthey sit next to us in class. They pass us in the aisle wearing an orange apron. They come toour table at a restaurant and ask us what we’d like to order.
Just as we can’t know why tragedy strikes in the first place, we may never fully understandwhere these men and women find the courage and strength to do what they did. What we doknow is that in a split-second moment where there’s little time for internal reflection ordebate, the actions of these individuals were driven by love -- love for a family member, lovefor a friend, or just love for a fellow human being.
  
That’s good to know. In a world that can be cruel and selfish, it’s this knowledge -- theknowledge that we are inclined to love one another, that we’re inclined to do good, to be good-- that causes us to take heart. We see with fresh eyes what’s precious and so fragile and soimportant to us. We put aside our petty grievances and our minor disagreements. We seeourselves in the hopes and hardships of others. And in the stories of people like Dean andpeople like Christopher, we remember that each us contains reserves of resolve andcompassion. There are heroes all around us, all the time.
And so, in the wake of this tragedy, let us live up to their example -- to make each day count-- to live with the sense of mutual regard -- to live with that same compassion that theydemonstrated in their final hours. We are called by them to do everything we can to be worthyof the chance that we’ve been given to carry on.
I understand that at a memorial yesterday for Dean, his wife decided to play a recording ofDean whistling a song he loved -- Amazing Grace. The lyrics are a fitting tribute to what Joplinhas been through.
Through many dangers, toils and snaresI have already come;'Tis Grace that brought me safe thus farand Grace will lead me home…
Yea, when this flesh and heart shall fail,And mortal life shall cease,I shall possess within the veil,A life of joy and peace.
May those we’ve lost know peace, and may Grace guide the people of Joplin home.
God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
Thank you.
