Hello, NAACP!  Ah, it’s good to be back.  How you all doing today?  You doing fine?
Audience:  Yes!
President Obama:  You look fine.  All right, everybody have a seat.  I got some stuff to say.I've got some stuff to say.
Audience Member:  We love you!
President Obama:  I love you back.  You know that.
So, see, now, whenever people have, like, little signs, you all got to write it bigger, becauseI'm getting old now.  And I like that picture of me.  That's very nice.  Thank you.
Let’s get something out of the way up front.  I am not singing today.
Audience:  Awww --
  
President Obama:  Not singing.  Although I will say your board sang to me as I came in forthe photograph.  So I know there’s some good voices in the auditorium.
Let me also say what everybody knows but doesn’t always want to say out loud -- you allwould rather have Michelle here.  I understand.  I don't blame you.  But I will do my best tofill her shoes.  And she sends everybody her love.  And Malia and Sasha say hi, as well.
I want to thank your chair, Roslyn Brock.  I want to thank your president, Cornell Brooks.  Iwant to thank your Governor, Tom Wolf, who’s doing outstanding work and was here.  TheMayor of Philadelphia, Michael Nutter, who’s been a great friend and ally.  Governor DanMalloy of Connecticut, who’s here today.  And some outstanding members of Congress whoare here.  I want to just say thank you to all of you for your love, for your support, but mostimportantly, for the work that you are doing in your communities all across the country everysingle day.
It's not always received with a lot of fanfare.  Sometimes it's lonely work; sometimes it's hardwork; sometimes it's frustrating work.  But it's necessary work.  And it builds on a tradition ofthis organization that reshaped the nation.
For 106 years, the NAACP has worked to close the gaps between the words of our foundingthat we are all created equal, endowed by our Creator with certain unalienable rights -- thosewords try to match those with the realities that we live each and every day.
In your first century, this organization stood up to lynching and Jim Crow and segregation;helped to shepherd a Civil Rights Act and a Voting Rights Act.  I would not be here, and somany others would not be here, without the NAACP.
In your second century, we’ve worked together to give more of our children a shot at a qualityeducation; to help more families rise up out of poverty; to protect future generations fromenvironmental damage; to create fair housing; to help more workers find the purpose of agood job.  And together, we’ve made real progress -- including a My Brother’s Keeperinitiative to give more young people a fair shot in life; including the passage of a law thatdeclares health care is not a privilege for the few, but a right for all of us.
We made progress, but our work is not done.  By just about every measure, the life chancesfor black and Hispanic youth still lag far behind those of their white peers.  Our kids, America’schildren, so often are isolated, without hope, less likely to graduate from high school, lesslikely to earn a college degree, less likely to be employed, less likely to have health insurance,less likely to own a home.
Part of this is a legacy of hundreds of years of slavery and segregation, and structuralinequalities that compounded over generations.  It did not happen by accident.
  
Partly it’s a result of continuing, if sometimes more subtle, bigotry -- whether in who getscalled back for a job interview, or who gets suspended from school, or what neighborhood youare able to rent an apartment in -- which, by the way, is why our recent initiative tostrengthen the awareness and effectiveness of fair housing laws is so important.  So we can’tbe satisfied or not satisfied until the opportunity gap is closed for everybody in America.Everybody.
But today, I want to focus on one aspect of American life that remains particularly skewed byrace and by wealth, a source of inequity that has ripple effects on families and oncommunities and ultimately on our nation -- and that is our criminal justice system.
Now, this is not a new topic.  I know sometimes folks discover these things like they justhappened.  There’s a long history of inequity in the criminal justice system in America.  WhenI was in the state legislature in Illinois, we worked to make sure that we had videotaping ofinterrogations because there were some problems there.  We set up racial profiling laws toprevent the kind of bias in traffic stops that too many people experience.  Since my firstcampaign, I’ve talked about how, in too many cases, our criminal justice system ends upbeing a pipeline from underfunded, inadequate schools to overcrowded jails.
What has changed, though, is that, in recent years the eyes of more Americans have beenopened to this truth.  Partly because of cameras, partly because of tragedy, partly becausethe statistics cannot be ignored, we can’t close our eyes anymore.  And the good news -- andthis is truly good news -- is that good people of all political persuasions are starting to thinkwe need to do something about this.
So let’s look at the statistics.  The United States is home to 5 percent of the world’spopulation, but 25 percent of the world’s prisoners.  Think about that.  Our incarceration rateis four times higher than China’s.  We keep more people behind bars than the top 35European countries combined.  And it hasn’t always been the case -- this huge explosion inincarceration rates.  In 1980, there were 500,000 people behind bars in America -- half amillion people in 1980.  I was in college in 1980.  Many of you were not born in 1980 -- that’sokay.  I remember 1980 -- 500,000.  Today there are 2.2 million.  It has quadrupled since1980.  Our prison population has doubled in the last two decades alone.
Now, we need to be honest.  There are a lot of folks who belong in prison.  If we’re going todeal with this problem and the inequities involved then we also have to speak honestly.  Thereare some folks who need to be in jail.  They may have had terrible things happen to them intheir lives.  We hold out the hope for redemption, but they’ve done some bad things.Murderers, predators, rapists, gang leaders, drug kingpins -- we need some of those folksbehind bars.  Our communities are safer, thanks to brave police officers and hardworkingprosecutors who put those violent criminals in jail.
  
And the studies show that up to a certain point, tougher prosecutors and stiffer sentences forthese violent offenders contributed to the decline in violent crime over the last few decades.Although the science also indicates that you get a point of diminishing returns.  But it isimportant for us to recognize that violence in our communities is serious and that historically,in fact, the African American community oftentimes was under-policed rather than over-
policed.  Folks were very interested in containing the African American community so itcouldn’t leave segregated areas, but within those areas there wasn’t enough police presence.
But here’s the thing:  Over the last few decades, we’ve also locked up more and morenonviolent drug offenders than ever before, for longer than ever before.  And that is the realreason our prison population is so high.  In far too many cases, the punishment simply doesnot fit the crime.  If you’re a low-level drug dealer, or you violate your parole, you owe somedebt to society.  You have to be held accountable and make amends.  But you don’t owe 20years.  You don’t owe a life sentence.  That's disproportionate to the price that should be paid.
And by the way, the taxpayers are picking up the tab for that price.  Every year, we spend$80 billion to keep folks incarcerated -- $80 billion.  Now, just to put that in perspective, for$80 billion, we could have universal preschool for every 3-year-old and 4-year-old inAmerica.  That's what $80 billion buys.  For $80 billion, we could double the salary of everyhigh school teacher in America.   For $80 billion, we could finance new roads and new bridgesand new airports, job training programs, research and development.  We're about to get in abig budget debate in Washington -- what I couldn’t do with $80 billion.  It’s a lot of money.For what we spend to keep everyone locked up for one year, we could eliminate tuition atevery single one of our public colleges and universities.
As Republican Senator and presidential candidate Rand Paul has said -- no, and to his credit,he’s been consistent on this issue -- imprisoning large numbers of nonviolent drug offendersfor long periods of time, “costs the taxpayers money, without making them any safer.”
Roughly one-third of the Justice Department’s budget now goes toward incarceration -- one-
third.  And there are outstanding public servants at our Justice Department, starting with ouroutstanding Attorney General, Loretta Lynch -- and we’ve got some great prosecutors heretoday -- and they do outstanding work -- so many of them.  But every dollar they have tospend keeping nonviolent drug offenders in prison is a dollar they can’t spend going after drugkingpins, or tracking down terrorists, or hiring more police and giving them the resources thatwould allow them to do a more effective job community policing.
And then, of course, there are costs that can’t be measured in dollars and cents.  Because thestatistics on who gets incarcerated show that by a wide margin, it disproportionately impactscommunities of color.  African Americans and Latinos make up 30 percent of our population;they make up 60 percent of our inmates.  About one in every 35 African American men, one inevery 88 Latino men is serving time right now.  Among white men, that number is one in 214.The bottom line is that in too many places, black boys and black men, Latino boys and Latinomen experience being treated differently under the law.
  
And I want to be clear -- this is not just anecdote.  This is not just barbershop talk.  A growingbody of research shows that people of color are more likely to be stopped, frisked, questioned,charged, detained.  African Americans are more likely to be arrested.  They are more likely tobe sentenced to more time for the same crime.   And one of the consequences of this is,around one million fathers are behind bars.  Around one in nine African American kids has aparent in prison.
What is that doing to our communities?  What’s that doing to those children?  Our nation isbeing robbed of men and women who could be workers and taxpayers, could be more activelyinvolved in their children’s lives, could be role models, could be community leaders, and rightnow they’re locked up for a non-violent offense.
So our criminal justice system isn’t as smart as it should be.  It’s not keeping us as safe as itshould be.  It is not as fair as it should be.  Mass incarceration makes our country worse off,and we need to do something about it.
But here’s the good news.
Audience Member  All right, good news.
President Obama:  Good news.  Don’t get me preaching now.  I am feeling more hopefultoday because even now, when, let’s face it, it seems like Republicans and Democrats cannotagree on anything -- a lot of them agree on this.  In fact, today, back in Washington,Republican senators from Utah and Texas are joining Democratic senators from New Jerseyand Rhode Island to talk about how Congress can pass meaningful criminal justice reform thisyear.   That’s good news.  That is good news.  Good news.
That doesn’t happen very often.  And it’s not just senators. This is a cause that’s bringingpeople in both houses of Congress together.  It’s created some unlikely bedfellows.  You’vegot Van Jones and Newt Gingrich.  You’ve got Americans for Tax Reform and the ACLU. You’vegot the NAACP and the Koch brothers.  No, you’ve got to give them credit.  You’ve got to callit like you see it.  There are states from Texas and South Carolina to California andConnecticut who have acted to reduce their prison populations over the last five years andseen their crime rates fall.  That’s good news.
My Administration has taken steps on our own to reduce our federal prison population.  So Isigned a bill reducing the 100-1 sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine.  I’vecommuted the sentences of dozens of people sentenced under old drug laws that we nowrecognize were unfair, and yesterday I announced that I’m commuting dozens more.
Under the leadership of Attorney General Eric Holder -- now continued by Loretta Lynch --federal prosecutors got what he called “Smart on Crime,” which is refocusing efforts on theworst offenders, pursuing mandatory minimum sentences 20 percent less often than they didthe year before.  The idea is you don’t always have to charge the max.
  
To be a good prosecutor, you need to be proportionate.  And it turns out that we're solvingjust as many cases and there are just as many plea bargains, and it’s working.  It’s just thatwe’ve eliminated some of the excess.
And recently, something extraordinary happened.  For the first time in 40 years, America’scrime rate and incarceration rate both went down at the same time.  That happened last year.
So there’s some momentum building for reform.  There’s evidence mounting for why we needreform.  Now I want to spend the rest of my time just laying out some basic principles, somesimple ideas for what reform should look like, because we're just at the beginning of thisprocess and we need to make sure that we stay with it.  And I’m going to focus on whathappens in three places -- in the community, in the courtroom, and in the cell block.
So I want to begin with the community because I believe crime is like any other epidemic –-the best time to stop it is before it even starts.   And I’m going to go ahead and say what I’vesaid a hundred times before or a thousand times before, and what you've heard me saybefore, if we make investments early in our children, we will reduce the need to incarceratethose kids.
So one study found that for every dollar we invest in pre-K, we save at least twice that downthe road in reduced crime.  Getting a teenager a job for the summer costs a fraction of what itcosts to lock him up for 15 years.  Investing in our communities makes sense.  It savestaxpayer money if we are consistent about it, and if we recognize that every child deserveopportunity -- not just some, not just our own.
What doesn’t make sense is treating entire neighborhoods as little more than danger zoneswhere we just surround them.  We ask police to go in there and do the tough job of trying tocontain the hopelessness when we are not willing to make the investments to help lift thosecommunities out of hopelessness.  That's not just a police problem; that's a societal problem.
Places like West Philly, or West Baltimore, or Ferguson, Missouri -- they’re part of America,too.  They're not separate.   They’re part of America like anywhere else.  The kids there areAmerican kids, just like your kids and my kids.  So we’ve got to make sure boys and girls inthose communities are loved and cherished and supported and nurtured and invested in.  Andwe have to have the same standards for those children as we have for our own children.
If you are a parent, you know that there are times where boys and girls are going to act out inschool.  And the question is, are we letting principals and parents deal with one set of kidsand we call the police on another set of kids.  That's not the right thing to do.
We’ve got to make sure our juvenile justice system remembers that kids are different.  Don'tjust tag them as future criminals.  Reach out to them as future citizens.
  
And even as we recognize that police officers do one of the toughest, bravest jobs around --and as we do everything in our power to keep those police officers safe on the job -- I’vetalked about this -- we have to restore trust between our police and some of the communitieswhere they serve.  And a good place to start is making sure communities around the countryadopt the recommendations from the task force I set up -- that included law enforcement, butalso included young people from New York and from Ferguson, and they were able to arrive ata consensus around things like better training, better data collection -- to make sure thatpolicing is more effective and more accountable, but is also more unbiased.
So these are steps in the community that will lead to fewer folks being arrested in the firstplace.  Now, they won’t eliminate crime entirely.  There’s going to be crime.  That’s why thesecond place we need to change is in the courtroom.
For nonviolent drug crimes, we need to lower long mandatory minimum sentences -- or getrid of them entirely.  Give judges some discretion around nonviolent crimes so that,potentially, we can steer a young person who has made a mistake in a better direction.
We should pass a sentencing reform bill through Congress this year.  We need to askprosecutors to use their discretion to seek the best punishment, the one that's going to bemost effective, instead of just the longest punishment.  We should invest in alternatives toprison, like drug courts and treatment and probation programs -- which ultimately can savetaxpayers thousands of dollars per defendant each year.
Now, even if we’re locking up fewer people, even if we are reforming sentencing guidelines, asI’ve said before, some criminals still deserve to go to jail.  And as Republican Senator JohnCornyn has reminded us, “virtually all of the people incarcerated in our prisons will eventuallysomeday be released.” And that’s why the third place we need to reform is in the cell block.
So on Thursday, I will be the first sitting President to visit a federal prison.  And I’m going toshine a spotlight on this issue, because while the people in our prisons have made somemistakes -- and sometimes big mistakes -- they are also Americans, and we have to makesure that as they do their time and pay back their debt to society that we are increasing thepossibility that they can turn their lives around.
That doesn’t mean that we will turn everybody’s life around. That doesn’t mean there aren’tsome hard cases.  But it does mean that we want to be in a position in which if somebody inthe midst of imprisonment recognizes the error of their ways, is in the process of reflectingabout where they’ve been and where they should be going, we’ve got to make sure thatthey’re in a position to make the turn.
And that’s why we should not tolerate conditions in prison that have no place in any civilizedcountry.  We should not be tolerating overcrowding in prison.  We should not be toleratinggang activity in prison.  We should not be tolerating rape in prison.  And we shouldn’t bemaking jokes about it in our popular culture.  That’s no joke.  These things are unacceptable.
  
What’s more, I’ve asked my Attorney General to start a review of the overuse of solitaryconfinement across American prisons.  The social science shows that an environment like thatis often more likely to make inmates more alienated, more hostile, potentially more violent.Do we really think it makes sense to lock so many people alone in tiny cells for 23 hours aday, sometimes for months or even years at a time? That is not going to make us safer.That’s not going to make us stronger.  And if those individuals are ultimately released, howare they ever going to adapt?  It’s not smart.
Our prisons should be a place where we can train people for skills that can help them find ajob, not train them to become more hardened criminals.
Look, I don’t want to pretend like this is all easy.  But some places are doing better thanothers.  Montgomery County, Maryland put a job training center inside the prison walls -- togive folks a head start in thinking about what might you do otherwise than committing crime.That’s a good idea.
Here’s another good idea -- one with bipartisan support in Congress: Let’s reward prisonerswith reduced sentences if they complete programs that make them less likely to commit arepeat offense.  Let's invest in innovative new approaches to link former prisoners withemployers and help them stay on track.  Let’s follow the growing number of our states andcities and private companies who have decided to “Ban the Box” on job applications -- so thatformer prisoners who have done their time and are now trying to get straight with societyhave a decent shot in a job interview.  And if folks have served their time, and they’vereentered society, they should be able to vote.
Communities that give our young people every shot at success; courts that are tough but fair;prisons that recognize eventually the majority will be released and so seek to prepare thesereturning citizens to grab that second chance -- that’s where we need to build.
But I want to add this.  We can’t ask our police, or our prosecutors, or our prison guards, orour judges to bear the entire burden of containing and controlling problems that the rest of usare not facing up to and willing to do something about.
So, yes, we have to stand up to those who are determined to slash investments in ourcommunities at any cost -- cutting preschool programs, cutting job-training programs, cuttingaffordable housing programs, cutting community policing programs. That’s shortsighted.Those investments make this country strong.   We’ve got to invest in opportunity more thanever.
An African American man born roughly 25 years ago has just a one-in-two chance of beingemployed today.  More than one in three African American children are growing up in poverty.When America’s unemployment rate was 9.5 percent, when I first came into office, as it wasgoing up, we properly recognized this is a crisis.
  
Right now, the unemployment rate among African Americans is 9.5 percent.  What should wecall that?  It is a crisis.  And we have to be just as concerned about continuing to lift up jobopportunities for these young people.
So today, I’ve been talking about the criminal justice system, but we have to recognize thatit’s not something we can view in isolation.  Any system that allows us to turn a blind eye tohopelessness and despair, that’s not a justice system, it is an injustice system.  But that is anextension and a reflection of some broader decisions that we’re making as a society.  And thathas to change.  That has to change.
What the marchers on Washington knew, what the marchers in Selma knew, what folks likeJulian Bond knew, what the marchers in this room still know, is that justice is not only theabsence of oppression, it is the presence of opportunity.
Justice is giving every child a shot at a great education no matter what zip code they’re borninto.  Justice is giving everyone willing to work hard the chance at a good job with goodwages, no matter what their name is, what their skin color is, where they live.
Fifty years after the Voting Rights Act, justice is protecting that right for every American. Justice is living up to the common creed that says, I am my brother’s keeper and my sister’skeeper.  Justice is making sure every young person knows they are special and they areimportant and that their lives matter -- not because they heard it in a hashtag, but because ofthe love they feel every single day -- not just love from their parents, not just love from theirneighborhood, but love from police, love from politicians.  Love from somebody who lives onthe other side of the country, but says, that young person is still important to me.  That’swhat justice is.
And in the American tradition and in the immigrant tradition of remaking ourselves, in theChristian tradition that says none of us is without sin and all of us need redemption, justiceand redemption go hand in hand.
Right before I came out here, I met with four former prisoners, four ex-offenders.  Two ofthem were African American, one of them was Latino, one of them was white.  All of them hadamazing stories.  One of them dropped out of school when he was a young kid.  Now he’smaking film about his experience in the prison system.
One of them served 10 years in prison, then got a job at Five Guys -- which is a tasty burger -
- and they gave him an opportunity, and he rose up and became a general manager there,and now is doing anti-violence work here in the community.  
One of them, the young Latino man, he came out of prison and was given an opportunity toget trained on green jobs that are helping the environment but also gave him a marketableskill.  And he talked about how the way he’s staying out of trouble is he just keeps on thinkingabout his two daughters.
  
And I could relate to that, because you don’t want to disappoint your daughters.   You don’twant to disappoint those baby girls.  And so he says, I go to work and I come home, and Igrab that little baby and get a kiss, and that’s keeping me focused.
And then one of them, Jeff Copeland, was arrested six times before his 38th birthday.  He wasdrinking, using drugs, racked up DUI after DUI, sentence after sentence.  And he admits thatthe sentences he was getting for DUI weren’t reflective of all the trouble he was causing,could have been worse.  And Jeff spent so much time jogging in place in his cell that inmatesnicknamed him “The Running Man.”  And he was literally going nowhere, running in place.
And then, somehow, Jeff started examining his life.  And he said, “This isn’t me.”  So hedecided to hold himself accountable.  He quit drinking.  He went to AA.  Met a recruiter fromthe re-entry program at the Community College of Philadelphia, enrolled in classes once hewas released -- made sure to show up every day.  Graduated summa cum laude -- with a3.95 GPA.  And this fall he’ll graduate from Temple University with a major in criminal justiceand a minor in social work.  And he volunteers helping former inmates get their lives back ontrack.
And “it’s sort of a cliché,” he says, “but we can do anything.”  And just two years ago, “TheRunning Man” ran his first marathon -- because he’s going somewhere now.   “You never lookat crossing the finishing line,” he says of his journey, “you attack it by putting one mile afterthe other.  It takes steps.”  It takes steps.  That’s true for individuals.  It’s true for our nation.
Sometimes I get in debates about how to think about progress or the lack of progress when itcomes to issues of race and inequality in America.  And there are times where people say,“Oh, the President, he’s too optimistic.”  Or “he’s not talking enough about how bad thingsare.”  Oh, let me tell you something, I see what happens.  My heart breaks when I seefamilies who are impacted.  I spend time with those families and feel their grief. I see thoseyoung men on street corners and eventually in prisons, and I think to myself, they could beme; that the main difference between me and them is I had a more forgiving environment sothat when I slipped up, when I made a mistake, I had a second chance.  And they’ve got nomargin for error.
I know -- I know -- how hard things are for a lot of folks. But I also know that it takes steps.And if we have the courage to take that first step, then we take a second step.  And if wehave the courage to take the second step then suddenly we’ve taken 10 steps.  The next thingyou know, you’ve taken 100 steps. And that’s true not just for us as individuals, but that istrue for us as a nation.
We are not perfect, but we have the capacity to be more perfect.  Mile after mile; step afterstep.  And they pile up one after the other and pretty soon that finish line starts getting intosight, and we are not where we were.  We’re in a better place because we had the courage tomove forward.
  
So we cannot ignore the problems that we have, but we can’t stop running the race.  That’show you win the race.  That’s how you fix a broken system.  That’s how you change acountry.
The NAACP understands that.  Think about the race that you have run. Think about the raceahead.  If we keep taking steps toward a more perfect union, and close the gaps between whowe are and who we want to be, America will move forward.  There’s nothing we can’t do.
Thank you.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.
