Good afternoon, everybody.
Well, I want to start by thanking a few folks who’ve joined us today. We’ve got the mayor ofOsawatomie, Phil Dudley is here. We have your superintendent Gary French in the house. Andwe have the principal of Osawatomie High, Doug Chisam. And I have brought your formergovernor, who is doing now an outstanding job as Secretary of Health and Human Services --Kathleen Sebelius is in the house. We love Kathleen.
Well, it is great to be back in the state of Tex -- state of Kansas. I was giving Bill Self a hardtime, he was here a while back. As many of you know, I have roots here. I’m sure you’re allfamiliar with the Obamas of Osawatomie. Actually, I like to say that I got my name from myfather, but I got my accent -- and my values -- from my mother. She was born in Wichita. Hermother grew up in Augusta. Her father was from El Dorado. So my Kansas roots run deep.
My grandparents served during World War II. He was a soldier in Patton’s Army; she was aworker on a bomber assembly line. And together, they shared the optimism of a nation thattriumphed over the Great Depression and over fascism. They believed in an America wherehard work paid off, and responsibility was rewarded, and anyone could make it if they tried --no matter who you were, no matter where you came from, no matter how you started out.
And these values gave rise to the largest middle class and the strongest economy that theworld has ever known. It was here in America that the most productive workers, the mostinnovative companies turned out the best products on Earth. And you know what? EveryAmerican shared in that pride and in that success -- from those in the executive suites tothose in middle management to those on the factory floor.
  
So you could have some confidence that if you gave it your all, you’d take enough home toraise your family and send your kids to school and have your health care covered, put a littleaway for retirement.
Today, we’re still home to the world’s most productive workers. We’re still home to the world’smost innovative companies. But for most Americans, the basic bargain that made this countrygreat has eroded. Long before the recession hit, hard work stopped paying off for too manypeople. Fewer and fewer of the folks who contributed to the success of our economy actuallybenefited from that success. Those at the very top grew wealthier from their incomes andtheir investments -- wealthier than ever before. But everybody else struggled with costs thatwere growing and paychecks that weren’t -- and too many families found themselves rackingup more and more debt just to keep up.
Now, for many years, credit cards and home equity loans papered over this harsh reality. Butin 2008, the house of cards collapsed. We all know the story by now: Mortgages sold topeople who couldn’t afford them, or even sometimes understand them. Banks and investorsallowed to keep packaging the risk and selling it off. Huge bets -- and huge bonuses -- madewith other people’s money on the line. Regulators who were supposed to warn us about thedangers of all this, but looked the other way or didn’t have the authority to look at all.
It was wrong. It combined the breathtaking greed of a few with irresponsibility all across thesystem. And it plunged our economy and the world into a crisis from which we’re still fightingto recover. It claimed the jobs and the homes and the basic security of millions of people --innocent, hardworking Americans who had met their responsibilities but were still left holdingthe bag.
And ever since, there’s been a raging debate over the best way to restore growth andprosperity, restore balance, restore fairness. Throughout the country, it’s sparked protestsand political movements -- from the tea party to the people who’ve been occupying thestreets of New York and other cities. It’s left Washington in a near-constant state of gridlock.It’s been the topic of heated and sometimes colorful discussion among the men and womenrunning for president.
But, Osawatomie, this is not just another political debate. This is the defining issue of ourtime. This is a make-or-break moment for the middle class, and for all those who are fightingto get into the middle class. Because what’s at stake is whether this will be a country whereworking people can earn enough to raise a family, build a modest savings, own a home,secure their retirement. Now, in the midst of this debate, there are some who seem to be suffering from a kind ofcollective amnesia. After all that’s happened, after the worst economic crisis, the worstfinancial crisis since the Great Depression, they want to return to the same practices that gotus into this mess.
  
In fact, they want to go back to the same policies that stacked the deck against middle-classAmericans for way too many years. And their philosophy is simple: We are better off wheneverybody is left to fend for themselves and play by their own rules.
I am here to say they are wrong. I’m here in Kansas to reaffirm my deep conviction that we’regreater together than we are on our own. I believe that this country succeeds when everyonegets a fair shot, when everyone does their fair share, when everyone plays by the same rules.These aren’t Democratic values or Republican values. These aren’t 1 percent values or 99percent values. They’re American values. And we have to reclaim them.
You see, this isn’t the first time America has faced this choice. At the turn of the last century,when a nation of farmers was transitioning to become the world’s industrial giant, we had todecide: Would we settle for a country where most of the new railroads and factories werebeing controlled by a few giant monopolies that kept prices high and wages low? Would weallow our citizens and even our children to work ungodly hours in conditions that were unsafeand unsanitary? Would we restrict education to the privileged few? Because there were peoplewho thought massive inequality and exploitation of people was just the price you pay forprogress.
Theodore Roosevelt disagreed. He was the Republican son of a wealthy family. He praisedwhat the titans of industry had done to create jobs and grow the economy. He believed thenwhat we know is true today, that the free market is the greatest force for economic progressin human history. It’s led to a prosperity and a standard of living unmatched by the rest of theworld.
But Roosevelt also knew that the free market has never been a free license to take whateveryou can from whomever you can. He understood the free market only works when there arerules of the road that ensure competition is fair and open and honest. And so he busted upmonopolies, forcing those companies to compete for consumers with better services andbetter prices. And today, they still must. He fought to make sure businesses couldn’t profit byexploiting children or selling food or medicine that wasn’t safe. And today, they still can’t.
And in 1910, Teddy Roosevelt came here to Osawatomie and he laid out his vision for what hecalled a New Nationalism. “Our country,” he said, “…means nothing unless it means thetriumph of a real democracy…of an economic system under which each man shall beguaranteed the opportunity to show the best that there is in him.”
Now, for this, Roosevelt was called a radical. He was called a socialist -- even a communist.But today, we are a richer nation and a stronger democracy because of what he fought for inhis last campaign: an eight-hour work day and a minimum wage for women -- insurance forthe unemployed and for the elderly, and those with disabilities; political reform and aprogressive income tax.
  
Today, over 100 years later, our economy has gone through another transformation. Over thelast few decades, huge advances in technology have allowed businesses to do more with less,and it’s made it easier for them to set up shop and hire workers anywhere they want in theworld. And many of you know firsthand the painful disruptions this has caused for a lot ofAmericans.
Factories where people thought they would retire suddenly picked up and went overseas,where workers were cheaper. Steel mills that needed 100 -- or 1,000 employees are now ableto do the same work with 100 employees, so layoffs too often became permanent, not just atemporary part of the business cycle. And these changes didn’t just affect blue-collar workers.If you were a bank teller or a phone operator or a travel agent, you saw many in yourprofession replaced by ATMs and the Internet.
Today, even higher-skilled jobs, like accountants and middle management can be outsourcedto countries like China or India. And if you’re somebody whose job can be done cheaper by acomputer or someone in another country, you don’t have a lot of leverage with your employerwhen it comes to asking for better wages or better benefits, especially since fewer Americanstoday are part of a union.
Now, just as there was in Teddy Roosevelt’s time, there is a certain crowd in Washington who,for the last few decades, have said, let’s respond to this economic challenge with the same oldtune. “The market will take care of everything,” they tell us. If we just cut more regulationsand cut more taxes -- especially for the wealthy -- our economy will grow stronger. Sure, theysay, there will be winners and losers. But if the winners do really well, then jobs andprosperity will eventually trickle down to everybody else. And, they argue, even if prosperitydoesn’t trickle down, well, that’s the price of liberty.
Now, it’s a simple theory. And we have to admit, it’s one that speaks to our ruggedindividualism and our healthy skepticism of too much government. That’s in America’s DNA.And that theory fits well on a bumper sticker. But here’s the problem: It doesn’t work. It hasnever worked. It didn’t work when it was tried in the decade before the Great Depression. It’snot what led to the incredible postwar booms of the ‘50s and ‘60s. And it didn’t work when wetried it during the last decade. I mean, understand, it’s not as if we haven’t tried this theory.
Remember in those years, in 2001 and 2003, Congress passed two of the most expensive taxcuts for the wealthy in history. And what did it get us? The slowest job growth in half acentury. Massive deficits that have made it much harder to pay for the investments that builtthis country and provided the basic security that helped millions of Americans reach and stayin the middle class -- things like education and infrastructure, science and technology,Medicare and Social Security.
  
Remember that in those same years, thanks to some of the same folks who are now runningCongress, we had weak regulation, we had little oversight, and what did it get us? Insurancecompanies that jacked up people’s premiums with impunity and denied care to patients whowere sick, mortgage lenders that tricked families into buying homes they couldn’t afford, afinancial sector where irresponsibility and lack of basic oversight nearly destroyed our entireeconomy.
We simply cannot return to this brand of “you’re on your own” economics if we’re seriousabout rebuilding the middle class in this country. We know that it doesn’t result in a strongeconomy. It results in an economy that invests too little in its people and in its future. Weknow it doesn’t result in a prosperity that trickles down. It results in a prosperity that’senjoyed by fewer and fewer of our citizens.
Look at the statistics. In the last few decades, the average income of the top 1 percent hasgone up by more than 250 percent to 1.2 million dollars per year. I’m not talking aboutmillionaires, people who have a million dollars. I’m saying people who make a million dollarsevery single year. For the top one hundredth of 1 percent, the average income is now 27million dollars per year. The typical CEO who used to earn about 30 times more than his orher worker now earns 110 times more. And yet, over the last decade the incomes of mostAmericans have actually fallen by about 6 percent.
Now, this kind of inequality -- a level that we haven’t seen since the Great Depression -- hurtsus all. When middle-class families can no longer afford to buy the goods and services thatbusinesses are selling, when people are slipping out of the middle class, it drags down theentire economy from top to bottom. America was built on the idea of broad-based prosperity,of strong consumers all across the country. That’s why a CEO like Henry Ford made it hismission to pay his workers enough so that they could buy the cars he made. It’s also why arecent study showed that countries with less inequality tend to have stronger and steadiereconomic growth over the long run.
Inequality also distorts our democracy. It gives an outsized voice to the few who can affordhigh-priced lobbyists and unlimited campaign contributions, and it runs the risk of selling outour democracy to the highest bidder. It leaves everyone else rightly suspicious that thesystem in Washington is rigged against them, that our elected representatives aren’t lookingout for the interests of most Americans.
But there’s an even more fundamental issue at stake. This kind of gaping inequality gives lieto the promise that’s at the very heart of America: that this is a place where you can make itif you try. We tell people -- we tell our kids -- that in this country, even if you’re born withnothing, work hard and you can get into the middle class. We tell them that your children willhave a chance to do even better than you do. That’s why immigrants from around the worldhistorically have flocked to our shores.
  
And yet, over the last few decades, the rungs on the ladder of opportunity have grown fartherand farther apart, and the middle class has shrunk. You know, a few years after World War II,a child who was born into poverty had a slightly better than 50-50 chance of becoming middleclass as an adult. By 1980, that chance had fallen to around 40 percent. And if the trend ofrising inequality over the last few decades continues, it’s estimated that a child born today willonly have a one-in-three chance of making it to the middle class -- 33 percent.
It’s heartbreaking enough that there are millions of working families in this country who arenow forced to take their children to food banks for a decent meal. But the idea that thosechildren might not have a chance to climb out of that situation and back into the middle class,no matter how hard they work? That’s inexcusable. It is wrong. It flies in the face ofeverything that we stand for.
Now, fortunately, that’s not a future that we have to accept, because there’s another viewabout how we build a strong middle class in this country -- a view that’s truer to our history, avision that’s been embraced in the past by people of both parties for more than 200 years. It’s not a view that we should somehow turn back technology or put up walls around America.It’s not a view that says we should punish profit or success or pretend that government knowshow to fix all of society’s problems. It is a view that says in America we are greater together -
- when everyone engages in fair play and everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does theirfair share.
So what does that mean for restoring middle-class security in today’s economy? Well, it startsby making sure that everyone in America gets a fair shot at success. The truth is we’ll neverbe able to compete with other countries when it comes to who’s best at letting theirbusinesses pay the lowest wages, who’s best at busting unions, who’s best at lettingcompanies pollute as much as they want. That’s a race to the bottom that we can’t win, andwe shouldn’t want to win that race. Those countries don’t have a strong middle class. Theydon’t have our standard of living.
The race we want to win, the race we can win is a race to the top -- the race for good jobsthat pay well and offer middle-class security. Businesses will create those jobs in countrieswith the highest-skilled, highest-educated workers, the most advanced transportation andcommunication, the strongest commitment to research and technology.
The world is shifting to an innovation economy and nobody does innovation better thanAmerica. Nobody does it better. No one has better colleges. Nobody has better universities.Nobody has a greater diversity of talent and ingenuity. No one’s workers or entrepreneurs aremore driven or more daring. The things that have always been our strengths match upperfectly with the demands of the moment.
  
But we need to meet the moment. We’ve got to up our game. We need to remember that wecan only do that together. It starts by making education a national mission -- a nationalmission. Government and businesses, parents and citizens. In this economy, a highereducation is the surest route to the middle class. The unemployment rate for Americans with acollege degree or more is about half the national average. And their incomes are twice as highas those who don’t have a high school diploma. Which means we shouldn’t be laying off goodteachers right now -- we should be hiring them. We shouldn’t be expecting less of our schools–- we should be demanding more. We shouldn’t be making it harder to afford college -- weshould be a country where everyone has a chance to go and doesn’t rack up $100,000 of debtjust because they went.
In today’s innovation economy, we also need a world-class commitment to science andresearch, the next generation of high-tech manufacturing. Our factories and our workersshouldn’t be idle. We should be giving people the chance to get new skills and training atcommunity colleges so they can learn how to make wind turbines and semiconductors andhigh-powered batteries. And by the way, if we don’t have an economy that’s built on bubblesand financial speculation, our best and brightest won’t all gravitate towards careers in bankingand finance. Because if we want an economy that’s built to last, we need more of those youngpeople in science and engineering. This country should not be known for bad debt and phonyprofits. We should be known for creating and selling products all around the world that arestamped with three proud words: Made in America.
Today, manufacturers and other companies are setting up shop in the places with the bestinfrastructure to ship their products, move their workers, communicate with the rest of theworld. And that’s why the over 1 million construction workers who lost their jobs when thehousing market collapsed, they shouldn’t be sitting at home with nothing to do. They shouldbe rebuilding our roads and our bridges, laying down faster railroads and broadband,modernizing our schools -- all the things other countries are already doing to attract good jobsand businesses to their shores.
Yes, business, and not government, will always be the primary generator of good jobs withincomes that lift people into the middle class and keep them there. But as a nation, we’vealways come together, through our government, to help create the conditions where bothworkers and businesses can succeed. And historically, that hasn’t been a partisan idea.Franklin Roosevelt worked with Democrats and Republicans to give veterans of World War II -
- including my grandfather, Stanley Dunham -- the chance to go to college on the G.I. Bill. Itwas a Republican President, Dwight Eisenhower, a proud son of Kansas -- who started theInterstate Highway System, and doubled down on science and research to stay ahead of theSoviets.
Of course, those productive investments cost money. They’re not free. And so we’ve also paidfor these investments by asking everybody to do their fair share.
  
Look, if we had unlimited resources, no one would ever have to pay any taxes and we wouldnever have to cut any spending. But we don’t have unlimited resources. And so we have to setpriorities. If we want a strong middle class, then our tax code must reflect our values. Wehave to make choices.
Today that choice is very clear. To reduce our deficit, I’ve already signed nearly $1 trillion ofspending cuts into law and I’ve proposed trillions more, including reforms that would lower thecost of Medicare and Medicaid.
But in order to structurally close the deficit, get our fiscal house in order, we have to decidewhat our priorities are. Now, most immediately, short term, we need to extend a payroll taxcut that’s set to expire at the end of this month. If we don’t do that, 160 million Americans,including most of the people here, will see their taxes go up by an average of $1,000 startingin January and it would badly weaken our recovery. That’s the short term.
In the long term, we have to rethink our tax system more fundamentally. We have to askourselves: Do we want to make the investments we need in things like education andresearch and high-tech manufacturing -- all those things that helped make us an economicsuperpower? Or do we want to keep in place the tax breaks for the wealthiest Americans inour country? Because we can’t afford to do both. That is not politics. That’s just math.
Now, so far, most of my Republican friends in Washington have refused under anycircumstance to ask the wealthiest Americans to go to the same tax rate they were payingwhen Bill Clinton was president. So let’s just do a trip down memory lane here.
Keep in mind, when President Clinton first proposed these tax increases, folks in Congresspredicted they would kill jobs and lead to another recession. Instead, our economy creatednearly 23 million jobs and we eliminated the deficit. Today, the wealthiest Americans arepaying the lowest taxes in over half a century. This isn’t like in the early ‘50s, when the toptax rate was over 90 percent. This isn’t even like the early ‘80s, when the top tax rate wasabout 70 percent. Under President Clinton, the top rate was only about 39 percent. Today,thanks to loopholes and shelters, a quarter of all millionaires now pay lower tax rates thanmillions of you, millions of middle-class families. Some billionaires have a tax rate as low as 1percent. One percent.
That is the height of unfairness. It is wrong. It’s wrong that in the United States of America, ateacher or a nurse or a construction worker, maybe earns $50,000 a year, should pay a highertax rate than somebody raking in $50 million. It’s wrong for Warren Buffett’s secretary to paya higher tax rate than Warren Buffett. And by the way, Warren Buffett agrees with me. So domost Americans -- Democrats, independents and Republicans. And I know that many of ourwealthiest citizens would agree to contribute a little more if it meant reducing the deficit andstrengthening the economy that made their success possible.
  
This isn’t about class warfare. This is about the nation’s welfare. It’s about making choicesthat benefit not just the people who’ve done fantastically well over the last few decades, butthat benefits the middle class, and those fighting to get into the middle class, and theeconomy as a whole.
Finally, a strong middle class can only exist in an economy where everyone plays by the samerules, from Wall Street to Main Street. As infuriating as it was for all of us, we rescued ourmajor banks from collapse, not only because a full-blown financial meltdown would have sentus into a second Depression, but because we need a strong, healthy financial sector in thiscountry.
But part of the deal was that we wouldn’t go back to business as usual. And that’s why lastyear we put in place new rules of the road that refocus the financial sector on what should betheir core purpose: getting capital to the entrepreneurs with the best ideas, and financingmillions of families who want to buy a home or send their kids to college.
Now, we’re not all the way there yet, and the banks are fighting us every inch of the way. Butalready, some of these reforms are being implemented.
If you’re a big bank or risky financial institution, you now have to write out a “living will” thatdetails exactly how you’ll pay the bills if you fail, so that taxpayers are never again on thehook for Wall Street’s mistakes. There are also limits on the size of banks and new abilities forregulators to dismantle a firm that is going under. The new law bans banks from making riskybets with their customers’ deposits, and it takes away big bonuses and paydays from failedCEOs, while giving shareholders a say on executive salaries.
This is the law that we passed. We are in the process of implementing it now. All of this isbeing put in place as we speak. Now, unless you’re a financial institution whose businessmodel is built on breaking the law, cheating consumers and making risky bets that coulddamage the entire economy, you should have nothing to fear from these new rules.
Some of you may know, my grandmother worked as a banker for most of her life -- workedher way up, started as a secretary, ended up being a vice president of a bank. And I knowfrom her, and I know from all the people that I’ve come in contact with, that the vast majorityof bankers and financial service professionals, they want to do right by their customers. Theywant to have rules in place that don’t put them at a disadvantage for doing the right thing.And yet, Republicans in Congress are fighting as hard as they can to make sure that theserules aren’t enforced.
I’ll give you a specific example. For the first time in history, the reforms that we passed put inplace a consumer watchdog who is charged with protecting everyday Americans from beingtaken advantage of by mortgage lenders or payday lenders or debt collectors.
  
And the man we nominated for the post, Richard Cordray, is a former attorney general of Ohiowho has the support of most attorney generals, both Democrat and Republican, throughoutthe country. Nobody claims he’s not qualified.
But the Republicans in the Senate refuse to confirm him for the job; they refuse to let him dohis job. Why? Does anybody here think that the problem that led to our financial crisis was toomuch oversight of mortgage lenders or debt collectors?
Of course not. Every day we go without a consumer watchdog is another day when a student,or a senior citizen, or a member of our Armed Forces -- because they are very vulnerable tosome of this stuff -- could be tricked into a loan that they can’t afford -- something thathappens all the time. And the fact is that financial institutions have plenty of lobbyists lookingout for their interests. Consumers deserve to have someone whose job it is to look out forthem. And I intend to make sure they do. And I want you to hear me, Kansas: I will veto anyeffort to delay or defund or dismantle the new rules that we put in place.
We shouldn’t be weakening oversight and accountability. We should be strengtheningoversight and accountability. I’ll give you another example. Too often, we’ve seen Wall Streetfirms violating major anti-fraud laws because the penalties are too weak and there’s no pricefor being a repeat offender. No more. I’ll be calling for legislation that makes those penaltiescount so that firms don’t see punishment for breaking the law as just the price of doingbusiness.
The fact is this crisis has left a huge deficit of trust between Main Street and Wall Street. Andmajor banks that were rescued by the taxpayers have an obligation to go the extra mile inhelping to close that deficit of trust. At minimum, they should be remedying past mortgageabuses that led to the financial crisis. They should be working to keep responsiblehomeowners in their home. We’re going to keep pushing them to provide more time forunemployed homeowners to look for work without having to worry about immediately losingtheir house.
The big banks should increase access to refinancing opportunities to borrowers who haven’tyet benefited from historically low interest rates. And the big banks should recognize thatprecisely because these steps are in the interest of middle-class families and the broadereconomy, it will also be in the banks’ own long-term financial interest. What will be good forconsumers over the long term will be good for the banks.
Investing in things like education that give everybody a chance to succeed. A tax code thatmakes sure everybody pays their fair share. And laws that make sure everybody follows therules. That’s what will transform our economy. That’s what will grow our middle class again.In the end, rebuilding this economy based on fair play, a fair shot, and a fair share will requireall of us to see that we have a stake in each other’s success. And it will require all of us totake some responsibility.
  
It will require parents to get more involved in their children’s education. It will requirestudents to study harder. It will require some workers to start studying all over again. It willrequire greater responsibility from homeowners not to take out mortgages they can’t afford.They need to remember that if something seems too good to be true, it probably is.
It will require those of us in public service to make government more efficient and moreeffective, more consumer-friendly, more responsive to people’s needs. That’s why we’recutting programs that we don’t need to pay for those we do. That’s why we’ve made hundredsof regulatory reforms that will save businesses billions of dollars. That’s why we’re not justthrowing money at education, we’re challenging schools to come up with the most innovativereforms and the best results.
And it will require American business leaders to understand that their obligations don’t justend with their shareholders. Andy Grove, the legendary former CEO of Intel, put it best. Hesaid, “There is another obligation I feel personally, given that everything I’ve achieved in mycareer, and a lot of what Intel has achieved…were made possible by a climate of democracy,an economic climate and investment climate provided by the United States.”
This broader obligation can take many forms. At a time when the cost of hiring workers inChina is rising rapidly, it should mean more CEOs deciding that it’s time to bring jobs back tothe United States -- not just because it’s good for business, but because it’s good for thecountry that made their business and their personal success possible.
I think about the Big Three auto companies who, during recent negotiations, agreed to createmore jobs and cars here in America, and then decided to give bonuses not just to theirexecutives, but to all their employees, so that everyone was invested in the company’ssuccess.
I think about a company based in Warroad, Minnesota. It’s called Marvin Windows and Doors.During the recession, Marvin’s competitors closed dozens of plants, let hundreds of workersgo. But Marvin’s did not lay off a single one of their 4,000 or so employees -- not one. In fact,they’ve only laid off workers once in over a hundred years. Mr. Marvin’s grandfather even kepthis eight employees during the Great Depression.
Now, at Marvin’s when times get tough, the workers agree to give up some perks and somepay, and so do the owners. As one owner said, “You can’t grow if you’re cutting your lifeblood-- and that’s the skills and experience your workforce delivers.” For the CEO of Marvin’s, it’sabout the community. He said, “These are people we went to school with. We go to churchwith them. We see them in the same restaurants. Indeed, a lot of us have married local girlsand boys. We could be anywhere, but we are in Warroad.”
  
That’s how America was built. That’s why we’re the greatest nation on Earth. That’s what ourgreatest companies understand. Our success has never just been about survival of the fittest.It’s about building a nation where we’re all better off. We pull together. We pitch in. We doour part. We believe that hard work will pay off, that responsibility will be rewarded, and thatour children will inherit a nation where those values live on.
And it is that belief that rallied thousands of Americans to Osawatomie -- maybe even some ofyour ancestors -- on a rain-soaked day more than a century ago. By train, by wagon, onbuggy, bicycle, on foot, they came to hear the vision of a man who loved this country and wasdetermined to perfect it.
“We are all Americans,” Teddy Roosevelt told them that day. “Our common interests are asbroad as the continent.” In the final years of his life, Roosevelt took that same message allacross this country, from tiny Osawatomie to the heart of New York City, believing that nomatter where he went, no matter who he was talking to, everybody would benefit from acountry in which everyone gets a fair chance.
And well into our third century as a nation, we have grown and we’ve changed in many wayssince Roosevelt’s time. The world is faster and the playing field is larger and the challengesare more complex. But what hasn’t changed -- what can never change -- are the values thatgot us this far. We still have a stake in each other’s success. We still believe that this shouldbe a place where you can make it if you try. And we still believe, in the words of the man whocalled for a New Nationalism all those years ago, “The fundamental rule of our national life,”he said, “the rule which underlies all others -- is that, on the whole, and in the long run, weshall go up or down together.” And I believe America is on the way up.
Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.
