Earlier today, we finished a very productive summit that will be, I believe, a turning point in our pursuit ofglobal economic recovery. 
By any measure, the London summit was historic.  It was historic because of the size and the scope of thechallenges that we face, and because of the timeliness and magnitude of our response. 
The challenge is clear.  The global economy is contracting. Trade is shrinking.  Unemployment is rising. The international finance system is nearly frozen.  Even these facts can't fully capture the crisis that we'reconfronting, because behind them is the pain and uncertainty that so many people are facing.  We see itback in the United States.  We see it here in London.  We see it around the world:  families losing theirhomes, workers losing their jobs and their savings, students who are deferring their dreams.  So many havelost so much.  Just to underscore this point, back in the United States, jobless claims released today werethe highest in 26 years.  We owe it to all of our citizens to act, and to act with a sense of urgency.
In an age where our economies are linked more closely than ever before, the whole world has been touchedby this devastating downturn.  And today, the world's leaders have responded with an unprecedented set ofcomprehensive and coordinated actions.
Now, just keep in mind some historical context.  Faced with similar global challenges in the past, the worldwas slow to act, and people paid an enormous price.  That was true in the Great Depression, when nationsprolonged and worsened the crisis by turning inward, waiting for more than a decade to meet the challengetogether.  Even as recently as the 1980s, the slow global response deepened and widened a debt crisis inLatin America that pushed millions into poverty.

Today, we've learned the lessons of history.  I know that in the days leading up to the summit, some of youin the press, some commentators, confused honest and open debate with irreconcilable differences.  Butafter weeks of preparation, and two days of careful negotiation, we have agreed on a series ofunprecedented steps to restore growth and prevent a crisis like this from happening again.
Let me outline what I think has been most significant.
Number one, we are committed to growth and job creation.  All G20 nations have acted to stimulatedemand, which will total well over $2 trillion in global fiscal expansion.  The United States is also partneringwith the private sector to clean out the troubled assets, the legacy assets that are crippling some banks, andusing the full force of the government to ensure that our action leads directly to loans to businesses largeand small, as well as individuals who depend on credit.  And these efforts will be amplified by our G20partners, who are pursuing similarly comprehensive programs.
And we also agreed on bold action to support developing countries, so that we aren't faced with decliningmarkets that the global economy depends on.  Together, the G20 is tripling the IMF's lending capacity andpromoting lending by multilateral development banks to increase the purchasing power and expand marketsin every country.
We've also rejected the protectionism that could deepen this crisis.  History tells us that turning inward canhelp turn a downturn into a depression.  And this cooperation between the world's leading economiessignals our support for open markets, as does our multilateral commitment to trade finance that will grow ourexports and create new jobs.
That's all on the growth front.
And next we made enormous strides in committing ourselves to comprehensive reform of a failed regulatorysystem.  And together, I believe that we must put an end to the bubble-and-bust economy that has stood inthe way of sustained growth and enabled abusive risk-taking that endangers our prosperity.
At home, back in the States, our efforts began with the approach that Secretary Geithner proposed lastweek, the strongest regulatory reforms any nation has contemplated so far to prevent the massive failure ofresponsibility that we have already seen.  Today, these principles have informed and enabled thecoordinated action that we will take with our G20 partners. 
To prevent future crises, we agreed to increased transparency and capital protections for financialinstitutions. We're extending supervision to all systemically important institutions, markets and products,including hedge funds.  We'll identify jurisdictions that fail to cooperate, including tax havens, and takeaction to defend our financial system.  We will reestablish the Financial Stability Forum with a strongermandate.  And we will reform and expand the IMF and World Bank so they are more efficient, effective andrepresentative.

Finally, we are protecting those who don't always have a voice at the G20, but who have suffered greatly inthis crisis.  And the United States is ready to lead in this endeavor.  In the coming days, I intend to work withCongress to provide $448 million in immediate assistance to vulnerable populations -- from Africa to LatinAmerica -- and to double support for food safety to over $1 billion so that we are giving people the tools theyneed to lift themselves out of poverty.  We will also support the United Nations and World Bank as theycoordinate the rapid assistance necessary to prevent humanitarian catastrophe.
I have to say, though, that this is not just charity.  These are all future markets for all countries, and futuredrivers of world economic growth.
Let me also underscore my appreciation to Prime Minister Brown, his entire team, and all my colleaguesfrom around the world who contributed to the summit's success.  You know, it's hard for 20 heads of state tobridge their differences.  We've all got our own national policies; we all have our own assumptions, our ownpolitical cultures.  But our citizens are all hurting.  They all need us to come together.  So I'm pleased thatthe G20 has agreed to meet again this fall, because I believe that this is just the beginning.  Our problemsare not going to be solved in one meeting; they're not going to be solved in two meetings.  We're going tohave to be proactive in shaping events and persistent in monitoring our progress to determine whetherfurther action is needed.
I also want to just make a few remarks about additional meetings I had outside of the G20 context.  Whilehere in London I had the opportunity to hold bilateral meetings with leaders of Russia, China, South Korea,Saudi Arabia and India, as well as Great Britain.  And these discussions were extraordinarily valuable andproductive.  Of course, we spoke about additional steps to promote economic recovery and growth.  But wealso discussed coordinated actions on a range of issues:  how we could reduce the nuclear threat; how wecould forge a coordinated response to North Korea's planned missile launch; how we can turn backterrorism and stabilize Afghanistan; how we can protect our planet from the scourge of climate change.  I'mencouraged that we laid the groundwork for real and lasting progress on a host of these issues. 
Ultimately, the challenges of the 21st century can't be met without collective action.  Agreement will almostnever be easy, and results won't always come quickly.  But I am committed to respecting different points ofview, and to forging a consensus instead of dictating our terms.  That's how we made progress in the lastfew days.  And that's how we will advance and uphold our ideals in the months and years to come.
You know, at home, I've often spoken about a new era of responsibility.  And I believe strongly that this eramust not end at our borders.  In a world that's more and more interconnected, we all have responsibilities towork together to solve common challenges.  And although it will take time, I am confident that we will rebuildglobal prosperity if we act with a common sense of purpose, persistence, and the optimism that the momentdemands.
So I appreciate your attention, and I'm going to take a few questions.  I've got a list of a few people I'm goingto call on and then I will intersperse some folks I'm calling on randomly.
Helene Cooper.
Q    Mr. President, --

PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, I think we did okay.  You know, when I came here, it was with the intention oflistening and learning, but also providing American leadership.  And I think that the document that has beenproduced as well as the concrete actions that will follow reflect a range of our priorities.   
We wanted to make sure that we had a strong, coordinated response to growth -- and that's reflected in thedocument and in the actions that will be taken.  We thought it was important to make sure that we had astrong, coordinated regulatory response  -- and many of the details of the regulatory response draw fromprinciples that we had developed prior to coming here.  
We felt that it was very important to strengthen our international financial institutions because developingcountries, emerging markets are threatened -- even though they may not have been the cause of this crisis -
- they are threatened by capital flight; they're threatened by reduced trade finance; drops in consumerdemand in developed countries that were their export markets, and so we knew that it was going to beimportant to provide those countries with assistance.  And we have created as fundamental a reworking ofthe resources available to these international financial institutions as anything we've done in the last severaldecades.
So, overall, I'm pleased with the product.  And I'll leave it to others to determine whether me and my teamhad anything to do with that.  All right?
Chuck Todd.  Chuck.
Q    What concrete items that you got out of this G20 can you tell the American people back home who arehurting, the family struggling, seeing their retirement go down, or worrying about losing their job -- whathappened here today that helps that family back home in the heartland?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, as I said before, we've got a global economy, and if we're taking actions inisolation in the United States, but those actions are contradicted overseas, then we're only going to behalfway effective -- maybe not even half.  
You've seen, for example, a drastic decline in U.S. exports over the last several months.  You look at acompany like Caterpillar, in my home state of Illinois, which up until last year was doing extraordinarily well;in fact, export growth was what had sustained it even after the recession had begun.  As a consequence ofthe world recession, as a consequence of the contagion from the financial markets debilitating theeconomies elsewhere, Caterpillar is now in very bad shape.  So if we want to get Caterpillar back on its feet,if we want to get all those export companies back on their feet, so that they are hiring, putting people back towork, putting money in people's pockets, we've got to make sure that the global economy as a whole issuccessful.  
And this document, which affirms the need for all countries to take fiscal responses that increase demand,that encourages the openness of markets, those are all going to be helpful in us being able to fix what ailsthe economy back home.
Let me mix in a -- Justin Webb, BBC.  Where's Justin?  There he is.  Go ahead.

Q    Mr. President, in the spirit of openness, with which you say you're -- 
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Why don't you get a microphone?  See, everybody is complaining.  I'm sure that's allyour fellow British journalists.
Q    They're extraordinarily well behaved, Mr. President.  In the spirit of openness, with which you say you'regoing to run your administration, could you give us an insight into an area or areas where you came toLondon wanting something and you didn't get it; where you compromised, where you gave something awayto achieve the wider breakthrough agreement?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, I think that if you look at the language of the document, there are probablysome areas where it wasn't so much of a sacrifice as it might not have been our number-one priority, but itbecame clear that it was very important to certain other actors. 
I'd rather not specify what those precise items would be, because this is a collective document.  But there'sno doubt that each country has its own quirks and own particular issues that a leader may decide is really,really important; something that is non-negotiable for them.  And what we tried to do as much as possiblewas to accommodate those issues in a way that didn't -- did not hamper the effectiveness of the overalldocument to address what I think are the core issues related to this crisis.
Now, keep in mind -- I think that this kind of coordination really is historic.  I said in the meeting that if youhad imagined 10 years ago, or 20 years ago, or 30 years ago, that you'd have the leaders of Germany,France, China, Russia, Brazil, South Africa, a President of the United States named Obama -- formeradversaries, in some cases former mortal enemies, negotiating this swiftly on behalf of fixing the globaleconomy, you would have said, that's crazy.  And yet it was happening, and it happened with relatively little-- relatively few hiccups.  And I think that's a testimony to the great work that Gordon Brown did, and histeam, in organizing the summit, the collective work in our teams in doing some good preparation, somegood ground work.  So I'm very proud of what's been done.  
This alone is not enough.  And obviously the actions that each of us take in our individual countries are stillabsolutely vital.  So we have a set of principles, for example, around dealing with systemic risk that I thinkwill be very important in preventing the kinds of financial crises that we've seen.  
That does not entirely solve the problem of toxic assets that are still in U.S. banks and certain British banksand certain European banks.  And how each individual nation acts to deal with that is still going to be vitallyimportant.  How well we execute the respective stimulus programs around the world is going to be veryimportant.  The quicker they are, the more effective they are at actually boosting demand, the more all of uswill benefit.  The more encumbered they are by bureaucracy and mismanagement and corruption, that willhamper our development efforts as a whole.
So this is not a panacea, but it is a critical step, and I think it lays the foundation so that, should the actionsthat we've taken individually and collectively so far not succeed in boosting global demand and growth,should you continue to see a freezing of credit or a hemorrhaging of jobs around the world, I think we'vecreated a good foundation for this leadership to come back together again and take additional steps until weget it right.

Okay, Michael Shear.  Where's Michael?
Q    Thank you, Mr. President.  I wonder if you view this trip that you're on and the actions that you've takenhere at the G20 and with the bilateral meetings that you've had as representing a break from the foreignpolicy of your predecessor. And if so, could you describe where you see and how you see the principles thatguide a different view of the world?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, you know, I didn't accompany President Bush on his various summits, so Idon't know how he was operating.  And I won't -- I won't warrant a guess on that.
I can tell you that what I've tried to do since I started running for President and since I was sworn in asPresident, is to communicate the notion that America is a critical actor and leader on the world stage, andthat we shouldn't be embarrassed about that, but that we exercise our leadership best when we arelistening; when we recognize that the world is a complicated place and that we are going to have to act inpartnership with other countries; when we lead by example; when we show some element of humility andrecognize that we may not always have the best answer, but we can always encourage the best answer andsupport the best answer. 
So I think that's the -- that's the approach that we've tried to take in our foreign policy since myadministration came in.  Now, we come in at extraordinarily challenging times, and yet I actually think thatthat calls for this type of leadership even more.  But, ultimately, we won't know how effective we are until welook back a year from now, or two years from now, or three years from now and see if it worked.  
And what the American people care about I suspect are the same thing that the British people care about,and that is, are you putting people back to work?  Are businesses growing again?  Is business -- is creditflowing again?  And, you know -- and that's just true with respect to this summit.  But when it comes to ourAfghanistan policy, the question is going to be, have we made ourselves safer; have we reduced the risksand incidents of terrorism? 
And so the proof of the pudding is in the eating.  But hopefully, I think at least we've set a toneinternationally where people don't -- where they give us the benefit of the doubt.  They're still going to havetheir interests, and we're going to have ours.  There are going to be tough negotiations, and sometimeswe're going to have to walk away from those negotiations if we can't arrive at a common accord.  There aregoing to be real dangers that can't always be talked through and have to be addressed.  But at least we canstart with the notion that we're prepared to listen and to work cooperatively with countries around the world.
All right, let me sprinkle in another -- it's got to be an international person.  All right, this young lady rightthere.  
Mr. President, Emma Alberici from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.  At the moment, in theU.S., the U.K., and in Australia, executive salaries and bonuses are decided in the boardrooms of majorpublicly listed companies.  Who will be making those decisions on salaries and bonuses as a result of theagreement you've made here today?  And if it is still the boards, will they be guided by principles orlegislation?

PRESIDENT OBAMA:  The principles that we outlined I think put in place or move us in the direction of whatI consider to be best practices, which is that there is some accountability with respect to executivecompensation.
Now, theoretically, that should be the shareholders.  But the way that too many corporations have operatedfor too long is that you have a CEO who basically selects his board; the board, in a fairly cozy relationshipoftentimes with the executive, hires a executive compensation firm, which, surprisingly, tends to think thatit's necessary to retain the best talent to pay people $20 or $30 million a year; and we get into the kinds ofhabits and practices that I think have not been -- have not served shareholders well, I think ultimately distortthe decision-making of many CEOs.
When I was in the United States Senate, I actually worked on a piece of legislation that would -- made thesimple proposition that executive compensation should be subject to a shareholder vote, even if it wasnonbinding, so that there was transparency and accountability and perhaps a shame function that wouldtake place.  And that principle, I think, is reflected in these guidelines.
What it says is, is that if you get shareholders involved and those shareholders are given a set of principlesand best practices by which they can judge executive compensation, then you can still have outsizedrewards and success for successful business people, but it will be based on not short-term performance, notthree-month performance, not your ability to flip quick profits off products like derivatives that don't turn outto be particularly productive to the company, but based on sustained, effective growth.  And that's what'sembodied in these documents, and I think that you're going to see a lot of countries try to encourage thatkind of transparency and accountability. 
It doesn't mean the state micromanaging -- [sneezes] -- excuse me -- I've been fighting this all week -- itdoesn't mean that we want the state dictating salaries; we don't.  We -- I strongly believe in a free-marketsystem, and as I -- as I think people understand in America, at least, people don't resent the rich; they wantto be rich.  And that's good.  But we want to make sure that there's mechanisms in place that holds peopleaccountable and produces results.  Okay?
Got to go back to my crew.  Jake Tapper.
Thank you, Mr. President.  Two questions.  One, can you say with confidence that the steps the G20nations are taking today -- committing to today will help the world, or will prevent the world to avoid adepression or a deeper recession?
And two, your friend and ally, Prime Minister Brown, said that "The old Washington consensus is over; todaywe have reached a new consensus."  Is he right?  And what do you think he meant by that?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  In life there are no guarantees; in economics there are no guarantees.  The peoplewho thought they could provide guarantees, many of them worked at AIG and it didn't work out so well.  Sothere are always risks involved.

I have no doubt, though, that the steps that have been taken are critical to preventing us sliding into adepression.  They are bolder and more rapid than any international response that we've seen to a financialcrisis in memory.  And I think that they will have a concrete effect in our ability, individually, in each nation,to create jobs, save jobs that exist, grow the economy, loosen up credit, restore trust and confidence in thefinancial markets.
So these steps -- another way of putting it is I think the steps in the communiqué were necessary.  Whetherthey're sufficient, we've got to -- we've got to wait and see.  I'm actually confident, though, that given thecommon commitment in the United States and in the other G20 countries to act rapidly and boldly, that if wesee other inklings of panic in the marketplace, or things unwinding, that this group, once again, will respondas needed.
So I guess maybe just to use an analogy that was used several times in this meeting, an analogy that I'veused in the past:  You got a sick patient; I think we applied the right medicine; I think the patient is stabilized;there's still wounds that have to heal and there's still emergencies that could arise, but I think that you've gotsome pretty good care being applied. 
You had a second, follow-up question?
Prime Minister Brown saying -- 
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Oh, the Washington consensus.  Well, the Washington consensus, as I'm sureyou're aware, Jake, is sort of a term of art about a certain set of policies surrounding globalization and theapplication of a cookie-cutter model to economic growth, trade liberalization, deregulation that was popularand did help globalize and grow the economy, and was led by some of our leading economists andpolicymakers in Washington.  
I think that there's always been a spectrum of opinion about how unfettered the free market is.  And alongthat spectrum, I think there have been some who believe in very fierce regulation and are very suspicious ofglobalization, and there are others who think that it's always -- that the market is always king.  And I thinkwhat we've learned here, but if anybody had been studying history they would have understood earlier, isthat the market is the most effective mechanism for creating wealth and distributing resources to producegoods and services that history has ever known, but that it goes off the rail sometimes; that if it's completelyunregulated, that if there are no thoughtful frameworks to channel the creative energy of the market, that itcan end up in a very bad place.
And so, in that sense, I think that we just went through a couple of decades where there was an artificialcomplacency about the dangers of markets going off the rails.  And a crisis like this reminds us that we justhave to put in some common-sense rules of the road, without throwing out the enormous benefits thatglobalization have brought in terms of improving living standards, reducing the cost of goods, and bringingthe world closer together.
All right, I've got time for just a couple more questions.  I'm going to find a journalist here --

How about me?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  All right, I'm going to call on this gentleman right here.  He's been very persistent.
Excuse me.  China Central Television.  Since the world leaders have been talking about increasing thevoice and voting rights of developing countries, I would like to ask two questions instead of just one.  First ofall, on behalf of China --
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  I may choose which one I want to answer. Of course.  
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  That's always the danger of asking two questions.
First of all, you've had a very fruitful meeting with our President.  And during the Clinton administration,U.S.-China relationship were characterized, in Clinton's words, "strategic, constructive partnership."  Duringthe Bush era, it was -- the catchphrase was "stakeholder."  The Bush administration expects China tobecome a responsible stakeholder in international affairs.  Have you come up with a catchphrase of yourown?  And certainly it is not the G2, is it?
My second question is, on behalf of the world, politics is very local, even though we've been talking aboutglobal solution, as indicated by your recent preference over American journalists and British -- which isokay.  How can you make sure that you will do whatever you can so that -- that local politics will not trump ornegatively affect good international economics? Thank you, Mr. President.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, those are excellent questions.  On the first question, your Americancounterparts will tell you I'm terrible with those little catchphrases and sound bites.  So I haven't come upwith anything catchy yet, but if you have any suggestions, let me know.  I'll be happy to use them.
In terms of local politics, look, I'm the President of the United States.  I'm not the President of China, I'm notthe President of Japan, I'm not the President of the other participants here.  And so I have a directresponsibility to my constituents to make their lives better.  That's why they put me in there.  That accountsfor some of the questions here, about how concretely does me being here help them find a job, pay for theirhome, send their kids to college, live what we call the American Dream.  And I will be judged by myeffectiveness in meeting their needs and concerns.   
But in an era of integration and interdependence, it is also my responsibility to lead America into recognizingthat its interests, its fate is tied up with the larger world; that if we neglect or abandon those who aresuffering in poverty, that not only are we depriving ourselves of potential opportunities for markets andeconomic growth, but ultimately that despair may turn to violence that turns on us; that unless we areconcerned about the education of all children and not just our children, not only may we be deprivingourselves of the next great scientist who's going to find the next new energy source that saves the planet,but we also may make people around the world much more vulnerable to anti-American propaganda.

So if I'm effective as America's President right now, part of that effectiveness involves holding a -- providingAmericans insight into how their self-interest is tied up with yours.  And that's an ongoing project becauseit's not always obvious.  
And there are going to be times where short-term interests are going to differ; there's no doubt about it.  Andprotectionism is the classic example.  You can make arguments that if you can get away with protectingyour markets, as long as the other folks don't protect theirs, then in the short term you may benefit.  And itthen becomes important not only for me to try to give people a sense of why, over the long term, that'scounterproductive, but also it becomes important for me to put policies in place in the United States thatprovide a cushion, provide support for those people who may suffer local dislocations because ofglobalization.  And that's something that I think every government has to think about.            
There are individuals who will be harmed by a trade deal.  There are businesses who will go out of businessbecause of free trade.  And to the extent that a government is not there to help them reshape their companyor retrain for the new jobs that are being created, over time you're going to get people who see -- who rightlysee their personal self-interest in very narrow terms.  Okay?
Two more questions.  Jonathan Weisman. 
Thank you, Mr. President.  During the campaign you often spoke of a diminished power and authority ofthe United States over the last decade.  This is your first time in an international summit like this, and I'mwondering what evidence you saw of what you spoke of during the campaign.  And specifically, is thedeclaration of the end of the Washington consensus evidence of the diminished authority that you fearedwas out there?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, first of all, during the campaign I did not say that some of that loss of authoritywas inevitable.  I said it was traced to very specific decisions that the previous administration had made thatI believed had lowered our standing in the world.  And that wasn't simply my opinion; that was, it turns out,the opinion of many people around the world.  
I would like to think that with my election and the early decisions that we've made, that you're starting to seesome restoration of America's standing in the world.  And although, as you know, I always mistrust polls,international polls seem to indicate that you're seeing people more hopeful about America's leadership.
Now, we remain the largest economy in the world by a pretty significant margin.  We remain the mostpowerful military on Earth.  Our production of culture, our politics, our media still have -- I didn't mean to saythat with such scorn, guys -- you know I'm teasing -- still has enormous influence.  And so I do not buy intothe notion that America can't lead in the world.  I wouldn't be here if I didn't think that we had importantthings to contribute.  
I just think in a world that is as complex as it is, that it is very important for us to be able to forgepartnerships as opposed to simply dictating solutions.  Just a -- just to try to crystallize the example, there'sbeen a lot of comparison here about Bretton Woods.  "Oh, well, last time you saw the entire internationalarchitecture being remade."

Well, if there's just Roosevelt and Churchill sitting in a room with a brandy, that's a -- that's an easiernegotiation.  But that's not the world we live in, and it shouldn't be the world that we live in.
And so that's not a loss for America; it's an appreciation that Europe is now rebuilt and a powerhouse. Japan is rebuilt, is a powerhouse.  China, India -- these are all countries on the move.  And that's good. That means there are millions of people -- billions of people -- who are working their way out of poverty. And over time, that potentially makes this a much more peaceful world.   And that's the kind of leadership we need to show -- one that helps guide that process of orderly integrationwithout taking our eyes off the fact that it's only as good as the benefits of individual families, individualchildren:  Is it giving them more opportunity; is it giving them a better life?  If we judge ourselves by thosestandards, then I think America can continue to show leadership for a very long time.
I'm going to call one foreigner -- actually, I'm the foreigner.  That's why I smiled.  One correspondent notfrom America.  And then I will -- [vociferous commotion] -- we're not doing bidding here.  But I also want tomake sure that I'm not showing gender bias.  So this young lady right here -- not you, sir, I'm sorry. Q    Hi, Mr. President. 
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  How are you?
Thank you for choosing me.  I'm very well.  I'm from the Times of India.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Wonderful.
You met with our Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh.  What did you -- what is America doing to help Indiatackle terrorism emanating from Pakistan?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, first of all, your Prime Minister is a wonderful man. Thank you.  I agree.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well -- I agree.  
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Did you have something to do with that, or -- You seem to kind of take -- take creditfor it a little bit there.  Q    Really proud of him, sir.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Of course.  You should be proud of him.  I'm teasing you.

I think he's a very wise and decent man, and has done a wonderful job in guiding India, even prior to beingPrime Minister, along a path of extraordinary economic growth that is a marvel, I think, for all the world.
We did discuss the issue of terrorism.  And we discussed it not simply in terms of terrorism emanating fromPakistan, although obviously we are very concerned about extremists and terrorists who have made campin the border regions of Pakistan as well as in Afghanistan.  But we spoke about it more broadly in terms ofhow we can coordinate effectively on issues of counterterrorism.  
We also spoke about the fact that in a nuclear age, at a time when perhaps the greatest enemy of both Indiaand Pakistan should be poverty, that it may make sense to create a more effective dialogue between Indiaand Pakistan.  But obviously we didn't go in depth into those issues.  
We talked about a whole range of other issues related to, for example, energy, and how important it is forthe United States to lead by example in reducing our carbon footprint so that we can help to forgeagreements with countries like China and India that, on a per-capita basis, have a much smaller footprintand so justifiably chafe at the idea that they should have to sacrifice their development for our efforts tocontrol climate change; but also acknowledging that if China and India, with their populations, had the sameenergy usage as the average American, then we would have all melted by now.
And so that was a very interesting conversation that I will be pursuing not just with India, but hopefully withChina and with other countries around the world.  In some ways our European counterparts have movedmore quickly than we have on this issue. But I think even the Europeans have recognized that it's not easy. It's even harder during times of economic downturn.
And so we're going to have to combine the low-hanging fruit of energy efficiency with rapid technologicaladvances.  And to the extent that in some cases we can get international cooperation and pool our scientificand technical knowledge around things like developing coal sequestration, for example, that can beextremely helpful.  Okay?
I'm going to call on my last American correspondent, Chip.  And, Chip, my heart goes out to you. 
Q    Thank you.  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I appreciate that.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  I just heard about that.
Q    Certainly there is a lot of sentiment in G20 countries that the United States was a major cause of theglobal economic meltdown.  To what degree did that topic come up in your discussions?  Did it make itdifficult for some countries to accept advice from the United States when they blame the United States andits economic system for causing this in the first place?  And how do you respond to people who do blameAmerica?
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, you know, I don't think that -- I think my colleagues in the G20 wereextraordinarily gracious about my participation.

I think that they continue to express the desire to work with America, admiration about many thingsAmerican.  There were occasional comments, usually wedged into some other topic, that indicated fromtheir perspective that this started in America, or this started on Wall Street, or this started with particularbanks or companies.
Perhaps what helped was my willingness to acknowledge that  -- and it's hard to deny -- that some of thiscontagion did start on Wall Street.  And as I've said back home, as I've said in public and as I would say inprivate, we had a number of firms that took wild and unjustified risks, we had regulators that were asleep atthe switch, and it has taken an enormous toll on the U.S. economy and has spread to the world economy.
Now, I think that part of the reason people didn't give me too hard a time is because if you look at Europeanbanks or Asian banks, that they've had their own issues both in the past and in the future.  And I think therewas a very constructive discussion about the fact that, given global financial flows, that unless we've gotmuch more effective coordinated regulatory strategies, supervision, standards, that these problems willappear again.
Money is -- can move around the globe in a second.  And it will seek out the highest returns, and if thosehighest returns end up being built on a house of cards, then we're going to be seeing another threat to theworld financial system wherever that house of cards might be. 
And so, overall, I think there was an extraordinarily constructive approach among all the leaders.  I was veryimpressed with them.  I'm very grateful to them.  And I'm excited about the ability not just to help heal thiseconomy but also to make progress on a sustainable model of economic growth that relies less on a cycleof bubble and bust -- something that I've spoken about back home.
All right?  Thank you, everybody.  Appreciate it.