Well, hello, Belfast!  Hello, Northern Ireland!  You now know why it’s so difficult to speak afterMichelle -- she’s better than me. But on behalf of both of us, thank you so much for thisextraordinarily warm welcome. And I want to thank Hannah for introducing my wife.  We had a chance to speak with Hannahbackstage and she’s an extraordinary young woman, who I know is going to do even greaterthings in years to come. I want to thank two men, who I’ve hosted at the White House on many a St. Patrick’s Day, fortheir warm welcome -- First Minister Peter Robinson -- and Deputy First Minister MartinMcGuinness.  I spend the whole year trying to unite Washington around things, and theycome to visit on St. Patrick’s Day and they do it in a single afternoon.
I want to thank the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Teresa Villiers.  To all theMinisters in the audience; to Lord Mayor Máirtín Ó Muilleoir.  And I want to thank all thecitizens of Belfast and Northern Ireland for your hospitality.
As our daughters pointed out as we were driving in, I cause a big fuss wherever I go.  Sotraffic and barricades and police officers, and it’s all a big production, a lot of people areinvolved -- and I’m very, very grateful for accommodating us. 
  
The first time Michelle and I visited this island was about two years ago.  We were honored tojoin tens of thousands on College Green in Dublin.  We traveled to the little village ofMoneygall, where, as it turned out, my great-great-great grandfather was born.  And Iactually identified this individual in this place only a few years ago.  When I was first runningfor office in Chicago, I didn’t know this, but I wish I had.  When I was in Chicago, as I wascampaigning, they’d look at my last name and they’d say, “Oh, there’s an O’Bama from thehomeland running on the South Side, so he must be Irish -- but I've never heard the Gaelicname, Barack”  But it pays to be Irish in Chicago.
So while we were in Moneygall, I had a chance to meet my eighth cousin, Henry -- who’s alsoknown as Henry the Eighth.  We knew he was my cousin because his ears flapped out just likemine. I leafed through the parish logs where the names of my ancestors are recorded.  I evenwatched Michelle learn how to pull a proper pint of “black.”  Audience Member:  Whoop!  President Obama:  Who’s cheering for that?  So it was a magical visit.  But the only problem was it was far too short.  A volcano in Icelandforced us to leave before we could even spend the night.  So we’ve been eager for a chance toreturn to the Emerald Isle ever since -- and this time, we brought our daughters, too.  In particular, we wanted to come here, to Northern Ireland, a place of remarkable beauty andextraordinary history; part of an island with which tens of millions of Americans share aneternal relationship.  America’s story, in part, began right outside the doors of this gleaminghall.  Three hundred and twenty-five years ago, a ship set sail from the River Lagan for theChesapeake Bay, filled with men and women who dreamed of building a new life in a newland.  They, followed by hundreds of thousands more, helped America write those early chapters. They helped us win our independence. They helped us draft our Constitution.  Soon after,America returned to Belfast, opening one of our very first consulates here in 1796, whenGeorge Washington was still President. Today, names familiar to many of you are etched on schools and courthouses and solemnmemorials of war across the United States -- names like Wilson and Kelly, Campbell andO’Neill.  So many of the qualities that we Americans hold dear we imported from this land --perseverance, faith, an unbending belief that we make our own destiny, and an unshakabledream that if we work hard and we live responsibly, something better lies just around thebend. So our histories are bound by blood and belief, by culture and by commerce.  And our futuresare equally, inextricably linked.  And that’s why I’ve come to Belfast today -- to talk about thefuture we can build together. 
  
Your generation, a young generation, has come of age in a world with fewer walls.  You’vebeen educated in an era of instant information.  You’ve been tempered by some very difficulttimes around the globe.  And as I travel, what I’ve seen of young people like you -- aroundthe world, they show me these currents have conspired to make you a generation possessedby both a clear-eyed realism, but also an optimistic idealism; a generation keenly aware of theworld as it is, but eager to forge the world as it should be.  And when it comes to the futurewe share, that fills me with hope.  Young people fill me with hope. Here, in Northern Ireland, this generation has known even more rapid change than manyyoung people have seen around the world.  And while you have unique challenges of yourown, you also have unique reasons to be hopeful.  For you are the first generation in this landto inherit more than just the hardened attitudes and the bitter prejudices of the past.  You’rean inheritor of a just and hard-earned peace.  You now live in a thoroughly modern NorthernIreland.  Of course, the recessions that spread through nearly every country in recent years haveinflicted hardship here, too, and there are communities that still endure real pain.  But, day today, life is changing throughout the North.  There was a time people couldn’t have imaginedNorthern Ireland hosting a gathering of world leaders, as you are today.  And I want to thankChief Constable Matt Baggott for working to keep everyone safe this week. Northern Ireland is hosting the World Police and Fire Games later this year -- which DameMary Peters is helping to organize.  Golf fans like me had to wait a long six decades for theIrish Open to return to the North last year.  I am unhappy that I will not get a few rounds inwhile I'm here.  I did meet Rory McIlroy last year -- and Rory offered to get my swing“sorted," -- which was a polite way of saying, “Mr. President, you need help.”
None of that would have been imaginable a generation ago.  And Belfast is a different city. Once-abandoned factories are rebuilt.  Former industrial sites are reborn.  Visitors come fromall over to see an exhibit at the MAC, a play at the Lyric, a concert here at Waterfront Hall. Families crowd into pubs in the Cathedral Quarter to hear “trad.”  Students lounge at cafés,asking each other, “What’s the craic?”  So to paraphrase Seamus Heaney, it’s themanifestation of sheer, bloody genius.  This island is now chic. And these daily moments of life in a bustling city and a changing country, it may seemordinary to many of you -- and that’s what makes it so extraordinary.  That’s what yourparents and grandparents dreamt for all of you -- to travel without the burden of checkpoints,or roadblocks, or seeing soldiers on patrol.  To enjoy a sunny day free from the ever-presentawareness that violence could blacken it at any moment.  To befriend or fall in love withwhomever you want.  They hoped for a day when the world would think something differentwhen they heard the word “Belfast.”  Because of their effort, because of their courage thatday has come.  Because of their work, those dreams they had for you became the mostincredible thing of all -- they became a reality.  
  
It's been 15 years now since the Good Friday Agreement; since clenched fists gave way tooutstretched hands.  The people of this island voted in overwhelming numbers to see beyondthe scars of violence and mistrust, and to choose to wage peace.  Over the years, otherbreakthroughs and agreements have followed. That’s extraordinary, because for years, fewconflicts in the world seemed more intractable than the one here in Northern Ireland.  Andwhen peace was achieved here, it gave the entire world hope.  The world rejoiced in your achievement -- especially in America.  Pubs from Chicago to Bostonwere scenes of revelry, folks celebrating the hard work of Hume and Trimble and Adams andPaisley, and so many others.  In America, you helped us transcend our differences -- becauseif there’s one thing on which Democrats and Republicans in America wholeheartedly agree, it’sthat we strongly support a peaceful and prosperous Northern Ireland.  But as all of you know all too well, for all the strides that you’ve made, there’s still much workto do.  There are still people who haven’t reaped the rewards of peace.  There are those whoaren’t convinced that the effort is worth it.  There are still wounds that haven’t healed, andcommunities where tensions and mistrust hangs in the air.  There are walls that still stand;there are still many miles to go. From the start, no one was naïve enough to believe that peace would be anything but a longjourney.  Yeats once wrote “Peace comes dropping slow.”  But that doesn’t mean our effortsto forge a real and lasting peace should come dropping slow.  This work is as urgent now as ithas ever been, because there’s more to lose now than there has ever been.  In today’s hyper-connected world, what happens here has an impact on lives far from thesegreen shores.  If you continue your courageous path toward a permanent peace, and all thesocial and economic benefits that have come with it, that won’t just be good for you, it will begood for this entire island.  It will be good for the United Kingdom.  It will be good for Europe. It will be good for the world. We need you to get this right.  And what’s more, you set an example for those who seek apeace of their own.  Because beyond these shores, right now, in scattered corners of theworld, there are people living in the grip of conflict -- ethnic conflict, religious conflict, tribalconflicts -- and they know something better is out there.  And they’re groping to find a way todiscover how to move beyond the heavy hand of history, to put aside the violence.  They’restudying what you’re doing.  And they’re wondering, perhaps if Northern Ireland can achievepeace, we can, too.  You’re their blueprint to follow.  You’re their proof of what is possible --because hope is contagious.  They’re watching to see what you do next.  Now, some of that is up to your leaders.  As someone who knows firsthand how politics canencourage division and discourage cooperation, I admire the Northern Ireland Executive andthe Northern Ireland Assembly all the more for making power-sharing work.  That’s not easyto do.  It requires compromise, and it requires absorbing some pain from your own side.
  
I applaud them for taking responsibility for law enforcement and for justice, and I commendtheir effort to “Building a United Community” -- important next steps along yourtransformational journey.  Because issues like segregated schools and housing, lack of jobs and opportunity -- symbolsof history that are a source of pride for some and pain for others -- these are not tangential topeace; they’re essential to it.  If towns remain divided -- if Catholics have their schools andbuildings, and Protestants have theirs -- if we can’t see ourselves in one another, if fear orresentment are allowed to harden, that encourages division.  It discourages cooperation.    Ultimately, peace is just not about politics.  It’s about attitudes; about a sense of empathy;about breaking down the  divisions that we create for ourselves in our own minds and our ownhearts that don’t exist in any objective reality, but that we carry with us generation aftergeneration.  And I know, because America, we, too, have had to work hard over the decades, slowly,gradually, sometimes painfully, in fits and starts, to keep perfecting our union.  A hundred andfifty years ago, we were torn open by a terrible conflict.  Our Civil War was far shorter thanThe Troubles, but it killed hundreds of thousands of our people.  And, of course, the legacy ofslavery endured for generations.  Even a century after we achieved our own peace, we were not fully united.  When I was aboy, many cities still had separate drinking fountains and lunch counters and washrooms forblacks and whites.  My own parents’ marriage would have been illegal in certain states.  Andsomeone who looked like me often had a hard time casting a ballot, much less being on aballot.  But over time, laws changed, and hearts and minds changed, sometimes driven bycourageous lawmakers, but more often driven by committed citizens.  Politicians oftentimesfollow rather than lead.  And so, especially young people helped to push and to prod and toprotest, and to make common cause with those who did not look like them.  And thattransformed America -- so that Malia and Sasha’s generation, they have different attitudesabout differences and race than mine and certainly different from the generation before that. And each successive generation creates a new space for peace and tolerance and justice andfairness. And while we have work to do in many ways, we have surely become more tolerant and morejust, more accepting, more willing to see our diversity in America not as something to fear,but as something to welcome because it's a source of our national strength.  So as your leaders step forward to address your challenges through talks by all parties, they’llneed you young people to keep pushing them, to create a space for them, to changeattitudes.  Because ultimately, whether your communities deal with the past and face thefuture united together isn’t something you have to wait for somebody else to do –- that’s achoice you have to make right now. 
  
 It's within your power to bring about change.  Whether you are a good neighbor to someonefrom the other side of past battles -- that’s up to you.  Whether you treat them with thedignity and respect they deserve -- that’s up to you.  Whether you let your kids play with kidswho attend a different church -– that’s your decision.  Whether you take a stand againstviolence and hatred, and tell extremists on both sides that no matter how many times theyattack the peace, they will not succeed –- that is in your hands.  And whether you reach yourown outstretched hand across dividing lines, across peace walls, to build trust in a spirit ofrespect –- that’s up to you.  The terms of peace may be negotiated by political leaders, butthe fate of peace is up to each of us.  This peace in Northern Ireland has been tested over the past 15 years.  It's been tested overthe past year.  It will be tested again.  But remember something that President Clinton saidwhen he spoke here in Belfast just a few weeks after the horrors of Omagh.  That bomb, hesaid, “was not the last bomb of The Troubles; it was the opening shot of a vicious attack onthe peace.”  And whenever your peace is attacked, you will have to choose whether torespond with the same bravery that you’ve summoned so far, or whether you succumb to theworst instincts.  those impulses that kept this great land divided for too long.  You'll have tochoose whether to keep going forward, not backwards. And you should know that so long as you are moving forward, America will always stand byyou as you do.  We will keep working closely with leaders in Stormont, Dublin andWestminster to support your political progress.  We’ll keep working to strengthen oureconomies, including through efforts like the broad economic initiative announced on Friday tounlock new opportunities for growth and investment between our two countries’ businesses --because jobs and opportunity are essential to peace. Our scientists will keep collaborating with yours in fields like nanotechnology and clean energyand health care that make our lives better and fuel economic growth on both sides of theAtlantic -- because progress is essential to peace.  And because knowledge and understandingis essential to peace, we will keep investing in programs that enrich both of us -- programslike the one at Belfast Metropolitan College, which teaches students from West and NorthBelfast the skills they need for new jobs, and exchange programs that have given thousandsin Northern Ireland and the United States the chance to travel to each other’s communitiesand learn from one another. Now, one of those young people is here today.  Sylvia Gordon is the director of anorganization called Groundwork Northern Ireland, which aims to bring about change from theground up.   Where’s Sylvia?  Where’s Sylvia?  Is Sylvia here somewhere?  Where is she? She’s here somewhere.  You’re here, too, yes.  Some guy just waved, he said, “I’m here.”  Which is good, I appreciate you being here.
As someone who got my start as a community organizer, I was so impressed with what Sylviahas done, because a few years ago, Sylvia visited the United States to learn more about howAmericans organize to improve their communities.
  
So after she came home, Sylvia rolled up her sleeves here in Belfast and decided to dosomething about Alexandra Park.  Some of you may know this park.  For years, it was thoughtto be the only park in Europe still divided by a wall.  Think about that.  In all of Europe, thatone park has got a wall in the middle of it. 
Sylvia and her colleagues knew how hard it would be to do anything about a peace wall, butthey reached out to the police, they reached out to the Department of Justice.  They broughttogether people from across the communities.  They knew it was going to be hard, but theytried anyway.  And together, they all decided to build a gate to open that wall.  And now,people can walk freely through the park and enjoy the sun -- when it comes out -- just likepeople do every day in parks all around the world. A small bit of progress.  But the fact that so far we’ve only got a gate open and the wall is stillup means there’s more work to do.  And that’s the work of your generation.  As long as morewalls still stand, we will need more people like Sylvia.  We’ll need more of you, young people,who imagine the world as it should be; who knock down walls; who knock down barriers; whoimagine something different and have the courage to make it happen.  The courage to bringcommunities together, to make even the small impossibilities a shining example of what ispossible. And that, more than anything, will shape what Northern Ireland looks like 15 yearsfrom now and beyond. All of you -- every single young person here today -- possess something the generation beforeyours did not, and that is an example to follow.  When those who took a chance on peace gotstarted, they didn’t have a successful model to emulate.  They didn’t know how it wouldwork.  But they took a chance.  And so far, it has succeeded.  And the first steps are thehardest and requires the most courage.  The rest, now, is up to you. “Peace is indeed harder than war,” the Irish author Colum McCann recently wrote.  “And itsconstant fragility is part of its beauty.  A bullet need happen only once, but for peace to workwe need to be reminded of its existence again and again and again.” And that’s what we need from you.  That’s what we need from every young person inNorthern Ireland, and that’s what we need from every young person around the world.  Youmust remind us of the existence of peace -- the possibility of peace.  You have to remind us ofhope again and again and again.  Despite resistance, despite setbacks, despite hardship,despite tragedy, you have to remind us of the future again and again and again.  I have confidence you will choose that path; you will embrace that task.  And to those whochoose the path of peace, I promise you the United States of America will support you everystep of the way.  We will always be a wind at your back.  And as I said when I visited twoyears ago, I am convinced that this little island that inspires the biggest of things -- this littleisland, its best days are yet ahead. Good luck.  God bless you.  And God bless all the people of Northern Ireland. Thank you.
