Please be seated, everybody.  Good afternoon.  
Arne Duncan is one of my longest-serving Cabinet Secretaries, and he’s been a friend for a lotlonger than that.  So it’s with some regret and sorrow that I’ve accepted his decision to returnto our hometown of Chicago.  After more than six years of living in Washington, Arne’swonderful wife, Karen, and their excellent kids, Claire and Ryan -- who are also buddies ofmine -- wanted to move back home.  And that’s meant in the interim a lot of time apart.  
So I’ll be honest -- I pushed Arne to stay.  Sorry, guys.  But I also know from personalexperience how hard it is to be away from your family on a sustained basis.  So while I willmiss Arne deeply, he’s more than earned the right to return home.
Take a look at what Arne has accomplished over the last six and a half years.  He’s one of thelongest-serving Secretaries of Education in our history -- and one of the more consequential. In just a few years, Arne and his team have delivered some incredible results at every stageof the educational experience. More than 30 states have upped their investment in earlychildhood education.  Nearly every state in America has raised standards for teaching andlearning, and expectations for what our kids can learn, and our high school graduation rate isat an all-time high.  We’ve helped millions more families afford college, and more Americansare graduating from college than ever before.  And that’s just scratching the surface.
  
Arne has done more to bring our educational system -- sometimes kicking and screaming --into the 21st century than anybody else.  America is going to be better off for what he hasdone.  It's going to be more competitive and more prosperous.  It is going to be more equaland more upwardly mobile.  It’s a record that I truly believe no other Education Secretary canmatch.  Arne bleeds this stuff.  He cares so much about our kids. And he's been so passionateabout this work.  And everybody who interacts with him, including people who disagree withhim on some issues, never questions the genuineness and heart that he has brought to thisjob.  
So I couldn't be prouder of him.  And, for good measure, Arne also holds the record for mostpoints scored in an NBA All-Star game.  And he is my favorite partner in pickup basketball --the smartest player I know -- even though he’s very slow -- and has no hops.  He knows it'strue.  I will say, watching Ryan, by the way, that the son will soon be surpassing the fatherbecause this young man has got game.
Now, keep in mind, none of this change has been easy, and we still have a long way to go. One of the things about education is that it doesn’t deliver results tomorrow or the next day;this is a decade-long or longer proposition.   We plant seeds now; we make changes now; andwe watch each successive class benefit from these reforms.  And it goes in fits and starts, andwe have a decentralized system -- that's how our education tradition evolved.  So it's not easyand it's not quick, but we are making progress.  And we're not going to stop in these last 15months.
And that's why it's so important and why I think we're very lucky that, even as Arne stepsdown, we've got an exceptionally talented educator to step in -- and that is Dr. John King.  
John is already on Arne’s leadership team.  He’s been an educator all his life -- a teacher, aprincipal, a leader of schools, the New York State’s education chief.  He’s the right man to leadthe department.  He shares our commitment to preparing every child for success in a moreinnovative and competitive world.  He’s got a great team already at the Department ofEducation of which I am very, very proud.  His family is equally cool and good-looking. (Laughter.)  And he has equally exceptional children.  And I know that, together, we're goingto continue to be able to do great things on behalf of all our kids.
So, Arne and John, I want to wish both of you a hardy congratulations and good luck.
Now I'm going to let them say a few words, and then I'm just going to make a few remarksbefore I take some questions from the press. 
We'll start with Arne.
  
I'll try not to get up here and cry.  
  Secretary Duncan:  I've cried more today than I have in a while, so
I’ll start with the President.  And when he asked us to come to D.C. and work with him, thatwas about a one-minute conversation with my wife.  And it wasn’t that we wanted to leaveChicago; it wasn’t that I necessarily wanted to be the Education Secretary -- I just wanted tobe on his team and believed so much in what he was about and what he stood for.  
And I have to say, seven and a half years later, my admiration is only greater.  And it’s prettyremarkable -- it’s important for the folks to know, that every hard decision, his only questionwas, what’s the right thing to do for kids, and challenging us and our team to fight for kidsevery single day.  And often, that was a hard political decision, and that was never a factor. His passion and his commitment has been absolutely extraordinary.  For me, it’s not thepolitical leadership; it’s not the educational leadership; it’s the moral leadership.  
And I just can’t tell you, Mr. President, personally, what an unbelievable honor it was just tospend some time.  
And for those -- every day you see -- for folks who watched him last night talking about thehorrendous massacre, gun massacre in Oregon, and how preventable these things are, weneed that moral leadership. And please keep that fight
To our team, the team you have at the White House -- Cecilia and Denis and Valerie andothers -- it’s been extraordinary to work with DPC.  I don’t say this lightly -- I think our teamat the Department of Education is stronger than it’s ever been.  You never know over seven,eight years, how those teams go, and do you have the B team towards the end -- well, I thinkwe have the A team and a combination of being able to work with the White House -- Shaunand Sylvia and so many folks are here -- Anthony. We have the team in place.  I’m justextraordinarily hopeful and confident about what they can do together.  
Emma and Ted, and the rest of the crew -- you said a little bit about John -- and folks know,for all of us, this work is very, very personal.  For the President, it’s very personal.  For me it’svery personal.  John was one of those kids that probably shouldn’t be in a room like this, ifyou sort of look at the stereotypes.  And not the easiest time growing up -- he’ll tell you moreabout it -- he lost both his parents at a pretty early age; went to live with his brother.  Thatwasn’t very easy either.  But he had an amazing teacher who saw something in him, who kepthim going.  And today, he gets to stand here with the President.  
  
And so many times, I think we, as a society, write off kids that look like John and come fromplaces like John.  And to see what he can accomplish -- I think that’s what drives all of us. We know there are so many other kids out there we can reach.
And while I’m deeply, deeply sad to be leaving, I’m extraordinarily happy and thankful andproud that John is going to carry on this work with the team.  So I want to thank everybodyfor their hard work.
I quickly want to -- try not to get emotional here -- but thank my parents, as well.  My dadwas a lifelong educator at the University of Chicago, taught throughout his life.  My motherstarted an inner-city tutoring program before we were born, and raised all of us as a part ofthat program.  And that changed our lives.  And all our life, we saw what kids could do whenthey were given a chance.  And that’s why we do this work today.  And to be able to see whatshe did at one little corner at 46th and Greenwood, and to now have a chance over the pastsix and a half years to try and have an impact around the nation, because this man gave us achance -- for my family, I can’t tell you how much it means to us.
And then, finally, just to my family.  I love this work.  I love this team.  I love the President.  Ilove the chance to serve.  The only thing I love more is you guys.  And I can’t wait to comehome and see a couple more track meets and maybe get to coach Ryan a little bit, and maybehave a few more dinners, and maybe go to a movie someday -- that would be pretty amazing.
President Obama:  Wow! All right!
Secretary Duncan:  It’s been too long.  And so it’s been an amazing, amazing journey and Ifeel so proud and so lucky to have been a part of this team.  And, Mr. President, thanks forcreating the climate in which all of us here -- all of us here --could have the impact we did. And we can never repay the debt of gratitude we owe you for your leadership and yourcourage.  So thank you so much.  
And I want to turn it over to John.
Mr. President, for the opportunity to serve and for the faith that you've placed in me and theteam that we have at the department.
 Secretary King:  Thank you, Arne, for very kind words.  Thank you,
  
I’m deeply honored by the chance to serve and also deeply humbled by following in Arne’sfootsteps.  Arne is an extraordinary leader who I have watched demonstrate tremendouscourage in fighting for kids and fighting for what’s best for kids; but also he’s been willing tolisten -- to listen to folks and to make adjustments, and to make sure that everything we doevery day is towards the goal of greater equity.
Mr. President, you and Arne and our team at the department have laid out an ambitiousagenda -- from strengthening early childhood education and expanding access to earlychildhood, to raising standards for teaching and learning in K through 12, to ensuring thatmore Americans have access to high-quality higher education, to ensuring that we support ourteachers and that we invest in our teachers and provide the best preparation and support andleadership opportunities for them.  It’s an incredible agenda, and I’m proud to be able to carryit forward with the amazing team that we have at the department. 
Earlier this week, Arne gave a speech at the National Press Club, and in that speech, Arne saideducation can be the difference between life and death.  And I know that's true because it wasfor me.  I grew up in Brooklyn.  I lost my mom when I was eight; my dad when I was 12.  Mydad was very sick before he passed.  I moved around between family members and schools. But teachers, New York City public school teachers, are the reason that I am alive.  They arethe reason that I became a teacher.  They are the reason I am standing here today.  Thoseteachers created amazing educational experiences, but also gave me hope -- hope about whatis possible, what could be possible for me in life.
I know schools can't do it alone.  There’s work we have to do on economic development andhousing and health care.  But I know that my parents -- who spent their lives as New YorkCity public school educators -- believed that school was at the heart of our promise of equalityof opportunity for all Americans.  That's what they believed.  That's what the Presidentbelieves.  That's what Arne believes.  And that's what I feel very privileged to be able to workon with this amazing team we have at the department. 
Every child in the United States, every college student, every disconnected youth, everyworking parent who just wants a few more credits in order to improve their salary andposition at their job -- everyone deserves the kind of opportunity that I had to have a greateducation.  Every child deserves the kind of opportunity that my beautiful daughters, Aminaand Mireya, have to have a great education, the kind of education their grandparents workedto provide.
I’m so grateful to my very supportive wife, Melissa.  So grateful to the Secretary for theopportunity he gave me to join his team, and incredibly grateful to the President for theopportunity to work with a wonderful group of people at the Education Department to try toexpand opportunity.  
Thank you.
  
President Obama:  Thank you.
Two good men, doing really important work.  So I'm lucky to have them, both as colleaguesand as friends, and I'm looking forward to seeing even more work done in the next fewmonths.
We've got some other business to attend to.  So all of you who are here to celebrate Arne andJohn, you're lucky enough now to have to sit through -- a little bit of a press conference withme.  So make yourselves comfortable.  I warned the kids ahead of time.  I said, try not tolook completely bored.
I'm going to take a couple of questions from the press.  But first, a few additional pieces ofbusiness.
  First of all, we learned today that our businesses createdanother 118,000 new jobs in September, which means that we now have had 67 straightmonths of job creation; 13.2 million new jobs in all -- and an unemployment rate that hasfallen from a high of 10 percent down to 5.1 percent.  These long-term trends are obviouslygood news, particularly for every American waking up each morning and heading off to a newjob.
But we would be doing even better if we didn’t have to keep on dealing with unnecessarycrises in Congress every few months. And this is especially important right now, becausealthough the American economy has been chugging along at a steady pace, much of theglobal economy is softening.  We’ve seen an impact on our exports, which was a major driverof growth for us particularly at the beginning of the recovery.  And so our own growth couldslow if Congress does not do away with some of the counterproductive austerity measuresthat they have put in place, and if Congress does not avoid the kind of manufactured crisesthat shatter consumer confidence and could disrupt an already skittish global economy. 
On Wednesday, more than half of Republicans voted to shut down the government for thesecond time in two years.  The good news is that there were enough votes in both parties topass a last-minute bill to keep the government open and operating for another 10 weeksbefore we can get a more long-term solution.  But keep in mind that gimmick only sets upanother potential manufactured crisis just two weeks before Christmas. 
  
And I’ve said this before, I want to repeat it -- this is not the way the United States should beoperating.
Oftentimes I hear from folks up on Capitol Hill, “the need for American leadership,” “the needfor America to be number one.”  Well, you know what, around the globe, part of what makesus a leader is when we govern effectively and we keep our own house in order, and we passbudgets, and we can engage in long-term planning, and we can invest in the things that areimportant for the future.  That’s U.S. leadership. 
When we fail to do that, we diminish U.S. leadership.  It’s not how we are supposed tooperate.  And we can’t just keep on kicking down the road without solving any problems ordoing any long-term planning for the future.  That’s true for our military; that’s true for ourdomestic programs.  The American people, American families deserve better.  And we cangrow faster and the economy can improve if Congress acts with dispatch.  It will get worse ifthey don't. 
That’s why I want to be very clear:  I will not sign another shortsighted spending bill like theone Congress sent me this week.  We purchased ourselves 10 additional weeks; we need touse them effectively.
Keep in mind that a few years ago, both parties put in place harmful automatic cuts that makeno distinction between spending we don’t need and spending we do.  We can revisit thehistory of how that happened -- I have some rather grim memories of it.  But the notion wasthat even as we were bringing down the deficit, we would come up with a sustainable, smart,long-term approach to investing in the things that we need.  That didn't happen.  And so nowthese cuts that have been maintained have been keeping our economy from growing faster. It’s time to undo them.  If we don’t, then we will have to fund our economic and nationalsecurity priorities in 2016 at the same levels that we did in 2006.
Now, understand, during that decade, between 2006 and 2016, our economy has grown by 12percent.  Our population has grown by 8 percent.  New threats have emerged; newopportunities have appeared.  We can’t fund our country the way we did 10 years agobecause we have greater demands -- with an aging population, with kids who need schools,with roads that need to be fixed, with a military on which we are placing extraordinarydemands.
And we can’t cut our way to prosperity.  Other countries have tried it and it has not worked. We’ve grown faster than they have because we did not pursue these blind, unthinking cuts tonecessary investments for our growth.  And by the way, because we’ve grown faster thanthem, we’ve brought our deficits down faster than they have. 
  
I want to repeat this because the public apparently never believes it.  Since I took office,we’ve cut our deficits by two-thirds.  The deficit has not been going up; it has been comingdown -- precipitously.  We’ve cut our deficits by two-thirds.  They’re below the averagedeficits over the past 40 years.
So the bottom line is, Congress has to do its job.  It can't flirt with another shutdown.  Itshould pass a serious budget.  And if they do, and get rid of some of these mindless cuts,even as we're still prudent about maintaining the spending that we need but not spending wedon't need and is not working, their own non-partisan budget office estimates we’re going toadd an extra half-million jobs to our economy next year alone.  We can immediately put half amillion more people back to work if we just have a more sensible budget. 
And in these negotiations, nobody is going to get everything they want.  We have to worktogether, though, even if we disagree, in order to do the people’s business.  At some point wehave to want to govern, and not just play politics or play to various political bases.  At somepoint, we need to pass bills so that we can rebuild our roads, and keep our kids learning, andour military strong, and help people prepare for and recover from disasters.  That isCongress’s most basic job.  That’s what our government is supposed to do -- serve theAmerican people.
So with that, let me take some questions.  And I’ll start with Julie Pace of AP. 
Hang in there, kids.
Question:  It will be over soon.  Thank you, Mr. President.  There have been severaldevelopments in Syria that I wanted to ask you about, starting with Russia’s involvement. You met with President Putin earlier this week, and I wonder if you think he was honest withyou about his intentions in Syria.  If Russia is targeting groups beyond the Islamic State,including U.S.-aligned groups, does the U.S. military have an obligation to protect them?  Andon the situation in Syria more broadly, there have obviously been failures in the U.S. train-
and-equip program.  Do you believe that that program can be fixed or do you have to look atother options?  Would you, in particular, be willing to reconsider a no-fly zone, which severalpresidential candidates, including your former Secretary of State, are now calling for?
President Obama:  Well, first and foremost, let’s understand what’s happening in Syria andhow we got here.  What started off as peaceful protests against Assad, the president, evolvedinto a civil war because Assad met those protests with unimaginable brutality.  And so this isnot a conflict between the United States and any party in Syria; this is a conflict between theSyrian people and a brutal, ruthless dictator.
Point number two is that the reason Assad is still in power is because Russia and Iran havesupported him throughout this process.  And in that sense, what Russia is doing now is notparticularly different from what they had been doing in the past -- they’re just more overtabout it.
  
They’ve been propping up a regime that is rejected by an overwhelming majority of the Syrianpopulation because they’ve seen that he has been willing to drop barrel bombs on childrenand on villages indiscriminately, and has been more concerned about clinging to power thanthe state of his country.
So in my discussions with President Putin, I was very clear that the only way to solve theproblem in Syria is to have a political transition that is inclusive -- that keeps the state intact,that keeps the military intact, that maintains cohesion, but that is inclusive -- and the onlyway to accomplish that is for Mr. Assad to transition, because you cannot rehabilitate him inthe eyes of Syrians.  This is not a judgment I’m making; it is a judgment that theoverwhelming majority of Syrians make.
And I said to Mr. Putin that I’d be prepared to work with him if he is willing to broker with hispartners, Mr. Assad and Iran, a political transition -- we can bring the rest of the worldcommunity to a brokered solution -- but that a military solution alone, an attempt by Russiaand Iran to prop up Assad and try to pacify the population is just going to get them stuck in aquagmire.  And it won’t work.  And they will be there for a while if they don’t take a differentcourse.
I also said to him that it is true that the United States and Russia and the entire world have acommon interest in destroying ISIL.  But what was very clear -- and regardless of what Mr.Putin said -- was that he doesn’t distinguish between ISIL and a moderate Sunni oppositionthat wants to see Mr. Assad go.  From their perspective, they’re all terrorists.  And that’s arecipe for disaster, and it’s one that I reject.
So where we are now is that we are having technical conversations about de-confliction sothat we’re not seeing U.S. and American firefights in the air.  But beyond that, we’re veryclear in sticking to our belief and our policy that the problem here is Assad and the brutalitythat he has inflicted on the Syrian people, and that it has to stop.  And in order for it to stop,we’re prepared to work with all the parties concerned.  But we are not going to cooperate witha Russian campaign to simply try to destroy anybody who is disgusted and fed up with Mr.Assad’s behavior.
Keep in mind also, from a practical perspective, the moderate opposition in Syria is one that ifwe’re ever going to have to have a political transition, we need.  And the Russian policy isdriving those folks underground or creating a situation in which they are de-capacitated, andit’s only strengthening ISIL.  And that’s not good for anybody.
In terms of our support of opposition groups inside of Syria, I made very clear early on thatthe United States couldn’t impose a military solution on Syria either, but that it was in ourinterest to make sure that we were engaged with moderate opposition inside of Syria becauseeventually Syria will fall, the Assad regime will fall, and we have to have somebody who we’reworking with that we can help pick up the pieces and stitch back together a cohesive,coherent country.  And so we will continue to support them.
  
The training-and-equip program was a specific initiative by the Defense Department to see ifwe could get some of that moderate opposition to focus attention on ISIL in the easternportion of the country.  And I’m the first one to acknowledge it has not worked the way it wassupposed to, Julie.  And I think that the Department of Defense would say the same thing. And part of the reason, frankly, is because when we tried to get them to just focus on ISIL,the response we’d get back is, how can we focus on ISIL when every single day we’re havingbarrel bombs and attacks from the regime?  And so it’s been hard to get them to reprioritize,looking east, when they’ve got bombs coming at them from the west.
So what we’re doing with the train-and-equip is looking at where we have had success -- forexample, working with some of the Kurdish community in the east that pushed ISIL out --seeing if we can build on that.  But what we're also going to continue to do is to have contactswith and work with opposition that, rightly, believes that in the absence of some change ofgovernment inside of Syria we're going to continue to see civil war, and that is going toturbocharge ISIL recruitment and jihadist recruitment, and we're going to continue to haveproblems.
Now, last point I just want to make about this -- because sometimes the conversation here inthe Beltway differs from the conversation internationally.  Mr. Putin had to go into Syria notout of strength but out of weakness, because his client, Mr. Assad, was crumbling.  And it wasinsufficient for him simply to send them arms and money; now he’s got to put in his ownplanes and his own pilots.  And the notion that he put forward a plan and that somehow theinternational community sees that as viable because there is a vacuum there -- I didn't see,after he made that speech in the United Nations, suddenly the 60-nation coalition that wehave start lining up behind him. 
Iran and Assad make up Mr. Putin’s coalition at the moment. The rest of the world makes upours.  So I don't think people are fooled by the current strategy.  It does not mean that wecould not see Mr. Putin begin to recognize that it is in their interest to broker a politicalsettlement.  And as I said in New York, we're prepared to work with the Russians and theIranians, as well as our partners who are part of the anti-ISIL coalition to come up with thatpolitical transition.  And nobody pretends that it’s going to be easy, but I think it is stillpossible.  And so we will maintain lines of communication. 
But we are not going to be able to get those negotiations going if there is not a recognitionthat there’s got to be a change in government.  We're not going to go back to the status quoante.  And the kinds of airstrikes against moderate opposition that Russia is engaging in isgoing to be counterproductive.  It’s going to move us farther away rather than towards theultimate solution that we're all -- that we all should be looking for.
Question:  [Inaudible]
  
President Obama:  Julie, throughout this process, I think people have constantly looked foran easy, low-cost answer -- whether it’s we should have sent more rifles in early andsomehow then everything would have been okay; or if I had taken that shot even after Assadoffered to give up his chemical weapons, then immediately things would have folded, or theAssad regime would have folded, and we would have suddenly seen a peaceful Syria. 
This is a hugely, difficult, complex problem.  And I would have hoped that we would havelearned that from Afghanistan and Iraq, where we have devoted enormous time and effortand resources with the very best people and have given the Afghan people and the Iraqipeople an opportunity for democracy.  But it’s still hard, as we saw this week in Afghanistan. That's not by virtue of a lack of effort on our part, or a lack of commitment.  We’ve still got10,000 folks in Afghanistan.  We're still spending billions of dollar supporting that government,and it’s still tough.
So when I make a decision about the level of military involvement that we're prepared toengage in, in Syria, I have to make a judgment based on, once we start something we’ve gotto finish it, and we’ve got to do it well.  And do we, in fact, have the resources and thecapacity to make a serious impact -- understanding that we’ve still got to go after ISIL inIraq; we still have to support the training of an Iraqi military that is weaker than any of usperceived; that we still have business to do in Afghanistan.  And so I push -- and haveconsistently over the last four, five years sought out a wide range of opinions about steps thatwe can take potentially to move Syria in a better direction. 
I am under no illusions about what an incredible humanitarian catastrophe this is, and thehardships that we're seeing, and the refugees that are traveling in very dangerouscircumstances and now creating real political problems among our allies in Europe, and theheartbreaking images of children drowned trying to escape war, and the potential impact ofsuch a destabilized country on our allies in the region.  But what we have learned over the last10, 12, 13 years is that unless we can get the parties on the ground to agree to live togetherin some fashion, then no amount of U.S. military engagement will solve the problem.  And wewill find ourselves either doing just a little bit and not making a difference, and losingcredibility that way, or finding ourselves drawn in deeper and deeper into a situation that wecan't sustain.
And when I hear people offering up half-baked ideas as if they are solutions, or trying todownplay the challenges involved in this situation -- what I’d like to see people ask is,specifically, precisely, what exactly would you do, and how would you fund it, and how wouldyou sustain it?  And typically, what you get is a bunch of mumbo jumbo. 
So these are hard challenges.  They are ones that we are going to continue to pursue.  Thetopline message that I want everybody to understand is we are going to continue to go afterISIL.  We are going to continue to reach out to a moderate opposition.  We reject Russia’stheory that everybody opposed to Assad is a terrorist.  We think that is self-defeating.  It willget them into a quagmire.  It will be used as a further recruitment tool for foreign fighters.
  
We will work with the international community and our coalition to relieve the humanitarianpressure.  On refugees, we are working with the Turks and others to see what we can doalong the border to make things safer for people.  But ultimately, we're going to have to find away for a political transition if we're going to solve Syria.
Jon Karl.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:  Back in July you said that the gun issue has been the most frustrating of yourpresidency, and we certainly heard that frustration from you last night.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:  So in the last 15 months of your presidency, do you intend to do anythingdifferently to get Congress to act or to do something about this gun violence problem? 
And I have to get you to respond to something that Jeb Bush just said, and to be fair toGovernor Bush I want to read it directly.  Asked about the drive to take action in light of whathappened in Oregon, he said, “Look, stuff happens.  There’s always a crisis.  And the impulseis always to do something, and it’s not always the right thing to do.”  How would you react toGovernor Bush?
President Obama:  I don't even think I have to react to that one.  I think the Americanpeople should hear that and make their own judgments, based on the fact that every coupleof months, we have a mass shooting, and in terms of -- and they can decide whether theyconsider that “stuff happening”. 
In terms of what I can do, I’ve asked my team -- as I have in the past -- to scrub what kindsof authorities do we have to enforce the laws that we have in place more effectively to keepguns out of the hands of criminals.  Are there additional actions that we can take that mightprevent even a handful of these tragic deaths from taking place?  But as I said last night, thiswill not change until the politics change and the behavior of elected officials changes.
And so the main thing I’m going to do is I’m going to talk about this on a regular basis, and Iwill politicize it because our inaction is a political decision that we are making.
The reason that Congress does not support even the modest gun safety laws that weproposed after Sandy Hook is not because the majority of the American people don’t supportit.  I mean, normally, politicians are responsive to the views of the electorate.  Here you’vegot the majority of the American people think it’s the right thing to do.
  
Background checks, other common-sense steps that would maybe save some lives couldn’teven get a full vote.  And why is that?  It’s because of politics.  It’s because interest groupsfund campaigns, feed people fear. And in fairness, it’s not just in the Republican Party --although the Republican Party is just uniformly opposed to all gun safety laws.  And unless wechange that political dynamic, we’re not going to be able to make a big dent in this problem.
For example, you’ll hear people talk about the problem is not guns, it’s mental illness.  Well, ifyou talk to people who study this problem, it is true that the majority of these mass shootersare angry young men, but there are hundreds of millions of angry young men around theworld -- tens of millions of angry young men.  Most of them don’t shoot.  It doesn’t help usjust to identify -- and the majority of people who have mental illnesses are not shooters.  Sowe can’t sort through and identify ahead of time who might take actions like this.  The onlything we can do is make sure that they can’t have an entire arsenal when something snaps inthem.
And if we’re going to do something about that, the politics has to change.  The politics has tochange.  And the people who are troubled by this have to be as intense and as organized andas adamant about this issue as folks on the other side who are absolutists and think that anygun safety measures are somehow an assault on freedom, or communistic -- or a plot by meto takeover and stay in power forever or something.  I mean, there are all kinds of crackpotconspiracy theories that float around there -- some of which, by the way, are ratified byelected officials in the other party on occasion.
So we’ve got to change the politics of this.  And that requires people to feel -- not just feeldeeply -- because I get a lot of letters after this happens -- “do something!”  Well, okay,here’s what you need to do.  You have to make sure that anybody who you are voting for ison the right side of this issue.  And if they’re not, even if they’re great on other stuff, for acouple of election cycles you’ve got to vote against them, and let them know precisely whyyou’re voting against them.  And you just have to, for a while, be a single-issue voter becausethat’s what is happening on the other side. 
And that’s going to take some time.  I mean, the NRA has had a good start.  They’ve been atthis a long time, they’ve perfected what they do.  You’ve got to give them credit -- they’revery effective, because they don’t represent the majority of the American people but theyknow how to stir up fear; they know how to stir up their base; they know how to raise money;they know how to scare politicians; they know how to organize campaigns.  And the Americanpeople are going to have to match them in their sense of urgency if we’re actually going tostop this.
Which isn’t to say stopping all violence.  We’re not going to stop all violence.  Violence existsaround the world, sadly.  Part of original sin.  But our homicide rates are just a lot higher thanother places -- that, by the way, have the same levels of violence.  It’s just you can’t kill asmany people when you don’t have easy access to these kinds of weapons. 
  
And I’m deeply saddened about what happened yesterday.  But Arne is going back to Chicago-- let’s not forget, this is happening every single day in forgotten neighborhoods around thecountry.  Every single day.  Kids are just running for their lives, trying to get to school. Broderick, when we were down in New Orleans, sitting down with a group of young men,when we were talking about Katrina, and I’ve got two young men next to me, both of themhad been shot multiple times.  They were barely 20. 
So we got to make a decision.  If we think that’s normal, then we have to own it.  I don’tthink it’s normal.  I think it’s abnormal.  I think we should change it.  But I can’t do it bymyself. 
So the main thing I’m going to do, Jon, is talk about it.  And hope that over time I’m changingenough minds -- along with other leaders around the country -- that we start finally seeingsome action.  I don’t think it’s going to happen overnight.
Cheryl Bolen.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  To go back to your opening remarks, you said that youwon’t sign another short-term CR.  But as you know, yesterday Secretary Lew announced thatthe government’s borrowing authority would run out around November 5th.  Would yourecommend negotiating an increase in the debt ceiling as part of these budget negotiations onspending caps?  And also does the Speaker’s race complicate these negotiations?
President Obama:  I’m sure the Speaker’s race complicates these negotiations.  That was arhetorical question.  It will complicate the negotiations.  But when it comes to the debt ceiling,we're not going back there. 
Maybe it’s been a while, so let me just refresh everybody’s memory.  Raising the debt ceilingdoes not authorize us to spend more, it simply authorizes us to pay the bills that we havealready incurred.  It is the way for the United States to maintain its good credit rating -- thefull faith and credit of the United States. 
Historically, we do not mess with it.  If it gets messed with, it would have profoundimplications for the global economy and could put our financial system in the kind of tailspinthat we saw back in 2007-2008.  It’s just a bad thing to do.  So we're not going to negotiateon that.  It has to get done in the next five weeks.  So even though the continuing resolutionto keep the government open lasts for 10 weeks, we have to get the debt ceiling raised infive.  You've got a shorter timetable to get that done.
But here’s the bottom line:  Mitch McConnell, John Boehner, myself, Nancy Pelosi, Harry Reid-- we’ve all spoken and talked about trying to negotiate a budget agreement.  And, yes,Speaker Boehner’s decision to step down complicates it.
  
But I do think that there is still a path for us to come up with a reasonable agreement thatraises the spending caps above sequester to make sure that we can properly finance both ourdefense and nondefense needs, that maintains a prudent control of our deficits, and that wecan do that in short order.  It’s not that complicated.  The math is the math.
And what I’ve encouraged is that we get started on that work immediately, and we pushthrough over the next several weeks -- and try to leave out extraneous issues that mayprevent us from getting a budget agreement. 
I know, for example, that there are many Republicans who are exercised about PlannedParenthood.  And I deeply disagree with them on that issue, and I think that it’smischaracterized what Planned Parenthood does.  But I understand that they feel stronglyabout it, and I respect that.  But you can't have an issue like that potentially wreck the entireU.S. economy -- any more than I should hold the entire budget hostage to my desire to dosomething about gun violence.  I feel just as strongly about that and I think I’ve got betterevidence for it.  But the notion that I would threaten the Republicans that unless they passedgun safety measures that would stop mass shootings I’m going to shut down the governmentand not sign an increase in the debt ceiling would be irresponsible of me.  And the Americanpeople, rightly, would reject that.
Well, same is true for them.  There are some fights that we fight individually.  They want todefund Planned Parenthood, there’s a way to do it.  Pass a law, override my veto.  That's trueacross a whole bunch of issues that they disagree with me on, and that's how democracyworks.  I got no problem with that.
But you have to govern.  And I’m hoping that the next Speaker understands that the problemSpeaker Boehner had or Mitch McConnell had in not dismantling Obamacare, or noteliminating the Department of Education, or not deporting every immigrant in this countrywas not because Speaker Boehner or Mitch McConnell didn't care about conservativeprinciples.  It had to do with the fact that they can't do it in our system of government, whichrequires compromise.  Just like I can't do everything I want in passing an immigration bill, orpassing a gun safety bill.  And that doesn't mean, then, I throw a tantrum and try to wreckthe economy, and put hardworking Americans who are just now able to dig themselves out ofa massive recession, put them in harm’s way.  Wrong thing to do.
Peter Alexander.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You addressed -- I want to follow up on Jon’s questionsabout the issue that’s obviously deeply personal and moving to you -- that is the gun issue. Apart from Congress’s inaction, apart from the desire for new laws and, beyond that, apartfrom the gun lobby, as you noted, the pattern is that these perpetrators are angry, aggrieved,oftentimes mentally ill young men.  Is there something that you can do with the bully pulpit,with your moral authority, with your remaining time in office to help reach these individualswho believe that gun violence is the way out? 
  
President Obama:  No.  I think I can continue to speak to the American people as a wholeand hopefully model for them basic social norms about rejecting violence, and cooperationand caring for other people.  But there are a lot of young men out there.  And having beenone myself once, I can tell you that us being able to identify or pinpoint who might haveproblems is extraordinarily difficult. 
So I think we, as a culture, should continuously think about how we can nurture our kids,protect our kids, talk to them about conflict resolution, discourage violence.  And I think thereare poor communities where, rather than mass shootings, you're seeing just normalinteractions that used to be settled by a fistfight settled with guns where maybe interventionprograms and mentorship and things like that can work.  That's the kind of thing that we'retrying to encourage through My Brother’s Keeper.
But when it comes to reaching every disaffected young man, 99 percent of -- or 99.9 percentof whom will hopefully grow out of it -- I don't think that there’s a silver bullet there.  The waywe are going to solve this problem is that when they act out, when they are disturbed, whenthat particular individual has a problem, that they can't easily access weapons that canperpetrate mass violence on a lot of people. 
Because that's what other countries do.  Again, I want to emphasize this.  There’s no showingthat somehow we are inherently more violent than any other advanced nation, or that youngmen are inherently more violent in our nation than they are in other nations.  I will say youngmen inherently are more violent than the rest of the population, but there’s no sense thatsomehow this is -- it’s something in the American character that is creating this.  Levels ofviolence are on par between the United States and other advanced countries.  What isdifferent is homicide rates and gun violence rates and mass shooting rates.  So it’s not thatthe behavior or the impulses are necessarily different as much as it is that they have access tomore powerful weapons.
Julia Edwards.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You just said that you reject President Putin’s approachto Syria and his attacks on moderate opposition forces.  You said it was a recipe for disaster. But what are you willing to do to stop President Putin and protect moderate oppositionfighters?  Would you consider imposing sanctions against Russia?  Would you go so far as toequip moderate rebels with anti-aircraft weapons to protect them from Russian air attacks? And how do you respond to critics who say Putin is outsmarting you, that he took a measureof you in Ukraine and he felt he could get away with it?
President Obama:  Yes, I’ve heard it all before.  I’ve got to say I’m always struck by thedegree to which not just critics but I think people buy this narrative. Let’s think about this.  Sowhen I came into office seven and a half years ago, America had precipitated the worstfinancial crisis in history, dragged the entire world into a massive recession.
  
We were involved in two wars with almost no coalition support.  U.S. -- world opinion aboutthe United States was at a nadir -- we were just barely above Russia at that time, and I thinkpotentially slightly below China’s.  And we were shedding 800,000 jobs a month, and so onand so forth. 
And today, we're the strongest large advanced economy in the world -- probably one of thefew bright spots in the world economy.  Our approval ratings have gone up.  We are moreactive on more international issues and forge international responses to everything from Ebolato countering ISIL. 
Meanwhile, Mr. Putin comes into office at a time when the economy had been growing andthey were trying to pivot to a more diversified economy, and as a consequence of thesebrilliant moves, their economy is contracting 4 percent this year.  They are isolated in theworld community, subject to sanctions that are not just applied by us but by what used to besome of their closest trading partners.  Their main allies in the Middle East were Libya andSyria -- Mr. Gaddafi and Mr. Assad -- and those countries are falling apart.  And he’s now justhad to send in troops and aircraft in order to prop up this regime, at the risk of alienating theentire Sunni world. 
So what was the question again?
No, but I think it’s really interesting to understand.  Russia is not stronger as a consequenceof what they’ve been doing.  They get attention.  The sanctions against Ukraine are still inplace.  And what I’ve consistently offered -- from a position of strength, because the UnitedStates is not subject to sanctions and we’re not contracting 4 percent a year -- what I’veoffered is a pathway whereby they can get back onto a path of growth and do right by theirpeople. 
So Mr. Putin’s actions have been successful only insofar as it’s boosted his poll ratings insideof Russia -- which may be why the beltway is so impressed, because that tends to be themeasure of success.  Of course, it’s easier to do when you’ve got a state-controlled media. 
But this is not a smart, strategic move on Russia’s part.  And what Russia has now done is notonly committed its own troops into a situation in which the overwhelming majority of theSyrian population sees it now as an enemy, but the Sunni population throughout the MiddleEast is going to see it as a supporter, an endorser, of those barrel bombs landing on kids -- ata time when Russia has a significant Muslim population inside of its own borders that it needsto worry about.
So I want Russia to be successful.  This is not a contest between the United States andRussia.  It is in our interest for Russia to be a responsible, effective actor on the internationalstage that can share burdens with us, along with China, along with Europe, along with Japan,along with other countries -- because the problems we have are big.
  
So I’m hopeful that Mr. Putin, having made this doubling-down of the support he has providedto Mr. Assad, recognizes that this is not going to be a good long-term strategy and that heworks instead to bring about a political settlement. 
Just as I hope that they can resolve the issues with Ukraine in a way that recognizes Russianequities but upholds the basic principle of sovereignty and independence that the Ukrainianpeople should enjoy like everybody else.  But until that time, we’re going to continue to havetensions and we’re going to continue to have differences. 
But we’re not going to make Syria into a proxy war between the United States and Russia. That would be bad strategy on our part.  This is a battle between Russia, Iran, and Assadagainst the overwhelming majority of the Syrian people.  Our battle is with ISIL, and ourbattle is with the entire international community to resolve the conflict in a way that can endthe bloodshed and end the refugee crisis, and allow people to be at home, work, grow food,shelter their children, send those kids to school.  That’s the side we’re on. 
This is not some superpower chessboard contest.  And anybody who frames it in that way isn’tpaying very close attention to what’s been happening on the chessboard.
All right, last question.  Major Garrett.
Question:  Mr. President, good to see you.
President Obama:  Good to see you.
Question:  And for the children there, I promise I won’t take too long.  So you’ve been verypatient.
President Obama:  I’ve been boring them to death, I guarantee it.  But there have beentimes where I’ve snagged rebounds for Ryan when he is shooting three-pointers so he has gotto put up with this.
Question:  Understood.  Mr. President, I wonder if you could tell the country to what degreeyou were changed or moved by what you discussed in private with Pope Francis?  What doyou think his visit might have meant for the country long term?  And for Democrats whomight already be wondering, is it too late for Joe Biden to decide whether or not to run forPresident?  And lastly, just to clarify, to what degree did Hillary Clinton’s endorsement justyesterday of a no-fly zone put her in a category of embracing a half-baked answer on Syriathat borders on mumbo jumbo?
President Obama:  On the latter issue, on the last question that you asked, Hillary Clinton isnot half-baked in terms of her approach to these problems.  She was obviously my Secretaryof State.
  
But I also think that there’s a difference between running for President and being President,and the decisions that are being made and the discussions that I’m having with the JointChiefs become much more specific and require, I think, a different kind of judgment.  Andthat’s what I’ll continue to apply as long as I’m here.  And if and when she’s President, thenshe’ll make those judgments.  And she’s been there enough that she knows that these aretough calls but that --
Question:  -- that she should know better?
President Obama:  No, that’s not what I said.  That’s perhaps what you said.  What I’msaying is, is that we all want to try to relieve the suffering in Syria, but my job is to make surethat whatever we do we are doing in a way that serves the national security interests of theAmerican people; that doesn’t lead to us getting into things that we can’t get out of or that wecannot do effectively; and as much as possible, that we’re working with internationalpartners. 
And we’re going to continue to explore things that we can do to protect people and to dealwith the humanitarian situation there, and to provide a space in which we can bring about thekind of political transition that’s going to be required to solve the problem.  And I think HillaryClinton would be the first to say that when you’re sitting in the seat that I’m sitting in, in theSituation Room, things look a little bit different -- because she’s been right there next to me.
I love Joe Biden, and he’s got his own decisions to make, and I’ll leave it at that.  And in themeantime, he’s doing a great job as Vice President and has been really helpful on a wholebunch of issues.
Pope Francis I love.  He is a good man with a warm heart and a big moral imagination.  And Ithink he had such an impact in his visit here -- as he has had around the world -- because hecares so deeply about the least of these, and in that sense expresses what I consider to be, asa Christian, the essence of Christianity.  And he’s got a good sense of humor.   Well, I can’tshare all his jokes.  They were all clean.
And as I said in the introduction in the South Lawn when he appeared here at the WhiteHouse, I think it’s really useful that he makes us uncomfortable in his gentle way; that he’sconstantly prodding people’s consciences and asking everybody all across the politicalspectrum what more you can do to be kind, and to be helpful, and to love, and to sacrifice,and to serve.  And in that sense, I don’t think he’s somebody where we should be applying thetypical American political measures -- liberal and conservative, and left and right -- I think heis speaking to all of our consciences, and we all have to then search ourselves to see if thereare ways that we can do better.
Question:  [Inaudible]
  
President Obama:  It did.  I think that when I spend time with somebody like the Pontiff --and there are other individuals, some of whom are famous, some of whom are not, but whoare good people and deeply moral -- then it makes me want to be better, makes me want todo better.  And those people are great gifts to the world.  And sometimes they’re just ateacher in a classroom. And sometimes they’re your neighbor.  And sometimes they’re yourmom, or your wife.  Sometimes they’re your kids.  But they can encourage you to be better. That’s what we’re all trying to do.
And that’s part of the wonderful thing about Pope Francis, is the humility that he brings to dothis.  His rejection of the absolutism that says I’m 100 percent right and you’re 100 percentwrong; but rather, we are all sinners and we are all children of God.  That’s a pretty goodstarting point for being better.
All right.  Thank you, guys, for your patience.  You can now go home.
Thanks.
