My fellow Americans, tonight I want to speak to you about what the United States will do withour friends and allies to degrade and ultimately destroy the terrorist group known as ISIL.
As Commander-in-Chief, my highest priority is the security of the American people.  Over thelast several years, we have consistently taken the fight to terrorists who threaten ourcountry.  We took out Osama bin Laden and much of al Qaeda's leadership in Afghanistan andPakistan.  We've targeted al Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen, and recently eliminated the topcommander of its affiliate in Somalia.  We've done so while bringing more than 140,000American troops home from Iraq, and drawing down our forces in Afghanistan, where ourcombat mission will end later this year.  Thanks to our military and counterterrorismprofessionals, America is safer. 
Still, we continue to face a terrorist threat.  We can't erase every trace of evil from the world,and small groups of killers have the capacity to do great harm.  That was the case before9/11, and that remains true today.  And that's why we must remain vigilant as threatsemerge.  At this moment, the greatest threats come from the Middle East and North Africa,where radical groups exploit grievances for their own gain.  And one of those groups is ISIL --which calls itself the "Islamic State."
Now let's make two things clear:  ISIL is not "Islamic."  No religion condones the killing ofinnocents.  And the vast majority of ISIL's victims have been Muslim.  And ISIL is certainlynot a state.  It was formerly al Qaeda's affiliate in Iraq, and has taken advantage of sectarianstrife and Syria's civil war to gain territory on both sides of the Iraq-Syrian border.
  
It is recognized by no government, nor by the people it subjugates.  ISIL is a terroristorganization, pure and simple.  And it has no vision other than the slaughter of all who standin its way.
In a region that has known so much bloodshed, these terrorists are unique in their brutality. They execute captured prisoners.  They kill children.  They enslave, rape, and force womeninto marriage.  They threatened a religious minority with genocide.  And in acts of barbarism,they took the lives of two American journalists -- Jim Foley and Steven Sotloff.
So ISIL poses a threat to the people of Iraq and Syria, and the broader Middle East --including American citizens, personnel and facilities.  If left unchecked, these terrorists couldpose a growing threat beyond that region, including to the United States.  While we have notyet detected specific plotting against our homeland, ISIL leaders have threatened America andour allies.  Our Intelligence Community believes that thousands of foreigners -– includingEuropeans and some Americans –- have joined them in Syria and Iraq.  Trained and battle-
hardened, these fighters could try to return to their home countries and carry out deadlyattacks.
I know many Americans are concerned about these threats.  Tonight, I want you to know thatthe United States of America is meeting them with strength and resolve.  Last month, Iordered our military to take targeted action against ISIL to stop its advances.  Since then,we've conducted more than 150 successful airstrikes in Iraq.  These strikes have protectedAmerican personnel and facilities, killed ISIL fighters, destroyed weapons, and given space forIraqi and Kurdish forces to reclaim key territory.  These strikes have also helped save the livesof thousands of innocent men, women and children. 
But this is not our fight alone.  American power can make a decisive difference, but we cannotdo for Iraqis what they must do for themselves, nor can we take the place of Arab partners insecuring their region.  And that's why I've insisted that additional U.S. action depended uponIraqis forming an inclusive government, which they have now done in recent days.  Sotonight, with a new Iraqi government in place, and following consultations with allies abroadand Congress at home, I can announce that America will lead a broad coalition to roll backthis terrorist threat.
Our objective is clear:  We will degrade, and ultimately destroy, ISIL through a comprehensiveand sustained counterterrorism strategy.
First, we will conduct a systematic campaign of airstrikes against these terrorists.  Workingwith the Iraqi government, we will expand our efforts beyond protecting our own people andhumanitarian missions, so that we're hitting ISIL targets as Iraqi forces go on offense. Moreover, I have made it clear that we will hunt down terrorists who threaten our country,wherever they are.  That means I will not hesitate to take action against ISIL in Syria, as wellas Iraq.  This is a core principle of my presidency:  If you threaten America, you will find nosafe haven. 
  
Second, we will increase our support to forces fighting these terrorists on the ground.  InJune, I deployed several hundred American servicemembers to Iraq to assess how we canbest support Iraqi security forces.  Now that those teams have completed their work –- andIraq has formed a government –- we will send an additional 475 servicemembers to Iraq.  AsI have said before, these American forces will not have a combat mission –- we will not getdragged into another ground war in Iraq.  But they are needed to support Iraqi and Kurdishforces with training, intelligence and equipment.  We'll also support Iraq's efforts to stand upNational Guard Units to help Sunni communities secure their own freedom from ISIL's control.
Across the border, in Syria, we have ramped up our military assistance to the Syrianopposition.  Tonight, I call on Congress again to give us additional authorities and resources totrain and equip these fighters.  In the fight against ISIL, we cannot rely on an Assad regimethat terrorizes its own people -- a regime that will never regain the legitimacy it has lost. Instead, we must strengthen the opposition as the best counterweight to extremists like ISIL,while pursuing the political solution necessary to solve Syria's crisis once and for all. 
Third, we will continue to draw on our substantial counterterrorism capabilities to prevent ISILattacks.  Working with our partners, we will redouble our efforts to cut off its funding; improveour intelligence; strengthen our defenses; counter its warped ideology; and stem the flow offoreign fighters into and out of the Middle East.  And in two weeks, I will chair a meeting ofthe U.N. Security Council to further mobilize the international community around this effort.
Fourth, we will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to innocent civilians who havebeen displaced by this terrorist organization.  This includes Sunni and Shia Muslims who are atgrave risk, as well as tens of thousands of Christians and other religious minorities.  Wecannot allow these communities to be driven from their ancient homelands. 
So this is our strategy.  And in each of these four parts of our strategy, America will be joinedby a broad coalition of partners.  Already, allies are flying planes with us over Iraq; sendingarms and assistance to Iraqi security forces and the Syrian opposition; sharing intelligence;and providing billions of dollars in humanitarian aid.  Secretary Kerry was in Iraq todaymeeting with the new government and supporting their efforts to promote unity.  And in thecoming days he will travel across the Middle East and Europe to enlist more partners in thisfight, especially Arab nations who can help mobilize Sunni communities in Iraq and Syria, todrive these terrorists from their lands.  This is American leadership at its best:  We stand withpeople who fight for their own freedom, and we rally other nations on behalf of our commonsecurity and common humanity. 
My Administration has also secured bipartisan support for this approach here at home.  I havethe authority to address the threat from ISIL, but I believe we are strongest as a nation whenthe President and Congress work together.  So I welcome congressional support for this effortin order to show the world that Americans are united in confronting this danger.
  
Now, it will take time to eradicate a cancer like ISIL.  And any time we take military action,there are risks involved –- especially to the servicemen and women who carry out thesemissions.  But I want the American people to understand how this effort will be different fromthe wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.  It will not involve American combat troops fighting onforeign soil.  This counterterrorism campaign will be waged through a steady, relentless effortto take out ISIL wherever they exist, using our air power and our support for partner forceson the ground.
This strategy of taking out terrorists who threaten us, while supporting partners on the frontlines, is one that we have successfully pursued in Yemen and Somalia for years.  And it isconsistent with the approach I outlined earlier this year:  to use force against anyone whothreatens America's core interests, but to mobilize partners wherever possible to addressbroader challenges to international order. 
My fellow Americans, we live in a time of great change. Tomorrow marks 13 years since ourcountry was attacked.  Next week marks six years since our economy suffered its worstsetback since the Great Depression.  Yet despite these shocks, through the pain we have feltand the grueling work required to bounce back, America is better positioned today to seize thefuture than any other nation on Earth.
Our technology companies and universities are unmatched.  Our manufacturing and autoindustries are thriving.  Energy independence is closer than it's been in decades.  For all thework that remains, our businesses are in the longest uninterrupted stretch of job creation inour history.  Despite all the divisions and discord within our democracy, I see the grit anddetermination and common goodness of the American people every single day –- and thatmakes me more confident than ever about our country's future.
Abroad, American leadership is the one constant in an uncertain world.  It is America that hasthe capacity and the will to mobilize the world against terrorists.  It is America that has ralliedthe world against Russian aggression, and in support of the Ukrainian peoples' right todetermine their own destiny.  It is America –- our scientists, our doctors, our know-how –-that can help contain and cure the outbreak of Ebola.  It is America that helped remove anddestroy Syria's declared chemical weapons so that they can't pose a threat to the Syrianpeople or the world again.  And it is America that is helping Muslim communities around theworld not just in the fight against terrorism, but in the fight for opportunity, and tolerance,and a more hopeful future.
America, our endless blessings bestow an enduring burden.  But as Americans, we welcomeour responsibility to lead.  From Europe to Asia, from the far reaches of Africa to war-torncapitals of the Middle East, we stand for freedom, for justice, for dignity.  These are valuesthat have guided our nation since its founding. 
  
Tonight, I ask for your support in carrying that leadership forward.  I do so as a Commander-
in-Chief who could not be prouder of our men and women in uniform –- pilots who bravely flyin the face of danger above the Middle East, and servicemembers who support our partners onthe ground.
When we helped prevent the massacre of civilians trapped on a distant mountain, here's whatone of them said:  "We owe our American friends our lives.  Our children will alwaysremember that there was someone who felt our struggle and made a long journey to protectinnocent people."
That is the difference we make in the world.  And our own safety, our own security, dependsupon our willingness to do what it takes to defend this nation and uphold the values that westand for –- timeless ideals that will endure long after those who offer only hate anddestruction have been vanquished from the Earth.
May God bless our troops, and may God bless the United States of America.
