Guten tag!  It is -- It is wonderful to see all of you, and I want to begin by thanking ChancellorMerkel for being here.   On behalf of the American people, I want to thank Angela for being achampion of our alliance.  And on behalf of all of us, I want to thank you for your commitmentto freedom, and equality, and human rights, which is a reflection of your inspiring life.  I trulybelieve you’ve shown us the leadership of steady hands -- how do you call it?  The Merkel-
Raute.    And over the last seven years, I have relied on your friendship and counsel, and yourfirm moral compass.  So we very much appreciate your Chancellor, Angela Merkel.
To the members of the Bundestag, Prime Minister Weil, Mayor Schostock, distinguishedguests, people of Germany.  And I’m especially pleased to see the young people here -- fromGermany and across Europe.  We also have some proud Americans here.
I have to admit that I have developed a special place in my heart for the German people. Back when I was a candidate for this office, you welcomed me with a small rally in Berlin,where I spoke of the change that’s possible when the world stands as one.  As President,you've treated me and Michelle and our daughters to wonderful hospitality.  You've offered meexcellent beer -- and weisswurst in Krun.  You've now hosted our delegation here inHannover. 
  
My only regret is that I have never been to Germany for Oktoberfest.    So I will have to comeback.  And I suspect it's more fun when you're not President.  So my timing will be good.
And as always, I bring the friendship of the American people.  We consider the Germanpeople, and all of our European allies, to be among our closest friends in the world -- becausewe share so much experience and so many of the same values.  We believe that nations andpeoples should live in security and peace.  We believe in creating opportunity that lifts up notjust the few but the many.  And I’m proud to be the first American President to come toEurope and be able to say that, in the United States, health care is not a privilege, it is now aright for all.  We share that as well.
Perhaps most importantly, we believe in the equality and inherent dignity of every humanbeing.  Today in America, people have the freedom to marry the person that they love.  Webelieve in justice, that no child in the world should ever die from a mosquito bite; that no oneshould suffer from the ache of an empty stomach; that, together, we can save our planet andthe world’s most vulnerable people from the worst effects of climate change.  These are thingsthat we share.  It's borne of common experience.
And this is what I want to talk to you about today -- the future that we are building together -
- not separately, but together.  And that starts right here in Europe.
And I want to begin with an observation that, given the challenges that we face in the worldand the headlines we see every day, may seem improbable, but it’s true.  We are fortunate tobe living in the most peaceful, most prosperous, most progressive era in human history.  Thatmay surprise young people who are watching TV or looking at your phones and it seems likeonly bad news comes through every day.  But consider that it’s been decades since the lastwar between major powers.  More people live in democracies.  We’re wealthier and healthierand better educated, with a global economy that has lifted up more than a billion people fromextreme poverty, and created new middle classes from the Americas to Africa to Asia.  Thinkabout the health of the average person in the world -- tens of millions of lives that we nowsave from disease and infant mortality, and people now living longer lives.
Around the world, we’re more tolerant -- with more opportunity for women, and gays andlesbians, as we push back on bigotry and prejudice.  And around the world, there’s a newgeneration of young people -- like you -- that are connected by technology, and driven byyour idealism and your imagination, and you're working together to start new ventures, andto hold governments more accountable, and advance human dignity.
  
If you had to choose a moment in time to be born, any time in human history, and you didn'tknow ahead of time what nationality you were or what gender or what your economic statusmight be, you'd choose today -- which isn't to say that there is not still enormous sufferingand enormous tragedy and so much work for us to do.  It is to remember that the trajectoryof our history over the last 50, 100 years has been remarkable.  And we can't take that forgranted, and we should take confidence in our ability to be able to shape our own destiny.
Now, that doesn't mean that we can be complacent because today dangerous forces dothreaten to pull the world backward, and our progress is not inevitable.  These challengesthreaten Europe and they threaten our transatlantic community.  We're not immune from theforces of change around the world.  As they have elsewhere, barbaric terrorists haveslaughtered innocent people in Paris and Brussels, and Istanbul and San Bernardino,California.  And we see these tragedies in places central to our daily lives -- an airport or café,a workplace or a theater -- and it unsettles us.  It makes us unsure in our day-to-day lives --fearful not just for ourselves but those that we love.  Conflicts from South Sudan to Syria toAfghanistan have sent millions fleeing, seeking the relative safety of Europe’s shores, but thatputs new strains on countries and local communities, and threatens to distort our politics.
Russian aggression has flagrantly violated the sovereignty and territory of an independentEuropean nation, Ukraine, and that unnerves our allies in Eastern Europe, threatening ourvision of a Europe that is whole, free and at peace.  And it seems to threaten the progressthat's been made since the end of the Cold War.
Slow economic growth in Europe, especially in the south, has left millions unemployed,including a generation of young people without jobs and who may look to the future withdiminishing hopes.  And all these persistent challenges have led some to question whetherEuropean integration can long endure; whether you might be better off separating off,redrawing some of the barriers and the laws between nations that existed in the 20th century.
Across our countries, including in the United States, a lot of workers and families are stillstruggling to recover from the worst economic crisis in generations.  And that trauma ofmillions who lost their jobs and their homes and their savings is still felt.  And meanwhile,there are profound trends underway that have been going on for decades -- globalization,automation that -- in some cases, of depressed wages, and made workers in a weakerposition to bargain for better working conditions.  Wages have stagnated in many advancedcountries while other costs have gone up.  Inequality has increased.  And for many people, it’sharder than ever just to hold on.
  
This is happening in Europe; we see some of these trends in the United States and across theadvanced economies.  And these concerns and anxieties are real.  They are legitimate.  Theycannot be ignored, and they deserve solutions from those in power.
Unfortunately, in the vacuum, if we do not solve these problems, you start seeing those whowould try to exploit these fears and frustrations and channel them in a destructive way.  Acreeping emergence of the kind of politics that the European project was founded to reject --an “us” versus “them” mentality that tries to blame our problems on the other, somebody whodoesn’t look like us or doesn’t pray like us -- whether it’s immigrants, or Muslims, orsomebody who is deemed different than us.
And you see increasing intolerance in our politics.  And loud voices get the most attention. This reminds me of the poem by the great Irish poet W.B. Yeats, where the best lack allconviction, and the worst are full of passionate intensity.
So this is a defining moment.  And what happens on this continent has consequences forpeople around the globe.  If a unified, peaceful, liberal, pluralistic, free-market Europe beginsto doubt itself, begins to question the progress that’s been made over the last severaldecades, then we can’t expect the progress that is just now taking hold in many places aroundthe world will continue.  Instead, we will be empowering those who argue that democracycan’t work, that intolerance and tribalism and organizing ourselves along ethnic lines, andauthoritarianism and restrictions on the press -- that those are the things that the challengesof today demand.
So I’ve come here today, to the heart of Europe, to say that the United States, and the entireworld, needs a strong and prosperous and democratic and united Europe.
Perhaps you need an outsider, somebody who is not European, to remind you of themagnitude of what you have achieved.  The progress that I described was made possible inlarge measure by ideals that originated on this continent in a great Enlightenment and thefounding of new republics.  Of course, that progress didn’t travel a straight line.  In the lastcentury -- twice in just 30 years -- the forces of empire and intolerance and extremenationalism consumed this continent.  And cities like this one were largely reduced to rubble. Tens of millions of men and women and children were killed.
  
But from the ruins of the Second World War, our nations set out to remake the world -- tobuild a new international order and the institutions to uphold it.  A United Nations to preventanother world war and advance a more just and lasting peace.  International financialinstitutions like the World Bank and International Monetary Fund to promote prosperity for allpeoples.   A Universal Declaration of Human Rights to advance the “inalienable rights of allmembers of the human family.”  And here in Europe, giants like Chancellor Adenauer set outto bind old adversaries through commerce and through trade.  As Adenauer said in those earlydays, “European unity was a dream of a few.  It became a hope for [the] many.  Today it is anecessity for all of us.”
And it wasn’t easy.  Old animosities had to be overcome.  National pride had to be joined witha commitment to a common good.  Complex questions of sovereignty and burden-sharing hadto be answered.  Ant at every step, the impulse to pull back -- for each country to go its ownway -- had to be resisted.  More than once, skeptics predicted the demise of this greatproject.
But the vision of European unity soldiered on -- and having defended Europe’s freedom inwar, America stood with you every step of this journey.  A Marshall Plan to rebuild; an airliftto save Berlin; a NATO alliance to defend our way of life.  America’s commitment to Europewas captured by a young American President, John F. Kennedy, when he stood in a free WestBerlin and declared that “freedom is indivisible, and when one man is enslaved, all are notfree.”
With strength and resolve and the power of our ideals, and a belief in a unified Europe, wedidn’t simply end the Cold War -- freedom won.  Germany was reunited.  You welcomed newdemocracies into an even “ever closer union.”  You may argue over whose football clubs arebetter, vote for different singers on Eurovision.    But your accomplishment -- more than 500million people speaking 24 languages in 28 countries, 19 with a common currency, in oneEuropean Union -- remains one of the greatest political and economic achievements of moderntimes.
Yes, European unity can require frustrating compromise.  It adds layers of government thatcan slow decision-making.  I understand.  I've been in meetings with the EuropeanCommission.  And, as an American, we're famously disdainful of government.  We understandhow easy it must be to vent at Brussels and complain.  But remember that every member ofyour union is a democracy.  That's not an accident.  Remember that no EU country has raisedarms against another.  That's not an accident.  Remember that NATO is as strong as it’s everbeen.
  
Remember that our market economies -- as Angela and I saw this morning -- are the greatestgenerators of innovation and wealth and opportunity in history.  Our freedom, our quality oflife remains the envy of the world, so much so that parents are willing to walk across deserts,and cross the seas on makeshift rafts, and risk everything in the hope of giving their childrenthe blessings that we -- that you -- enjoy -- blessings that you cannot take for granted.
This continent, in the 20th century, was at constant war.  People starved on this continent. Families were separated on this continent.  And now people desperately want to come hereprecisely because of what you've created.  You can't take that for granted.
And today, more than ever, a strong, united Europe remains, as Adenauer said, a necessityfor all of us.  It’s a necessity for the United States, because Europe’s security and prosperity isinherently indivisible from our own.  We can’t cut ourselves off from you.  Our economies areintegrated.  Our cultures are integrated.  Our peoples are integrated.  You saw the response ofthe American people to Paris and Brussels -- it’s because, in our imaginations, this is ourcities.
A strong, united Europe is a necessity for the world because an integrated Europe remainsvital to our international order.  Europe helps to uphold the norms and rules that can maintainpeace and promote prosperity around the world.
Consider what we’ve done in recent years:  Pulling the global economy back from the brink ofdepression and putting the world on the path of recovery.  A comprehensive deal that's cut offevery single one of Iran’s paths to a nuclear bomb -- part of our shared vision of a worldwithout nuclear weapons.  In Paris, the most ambitious agreement in history to fight climatechange.   Stopping Ebola in West Africa and saving countless lives.  Rallying the world aroundnew sustainable development, including our goal to end extreme poverty.  None of thosethings could have happened if I -- if the United States did not have a partnership with astrong and united Europe.   It wouldn’t have happened.
That’s what’s possible when Europe and America and the world stand as one.  And that’sprecisely what we're going to need to face down the very real dangers that we face today.  Solet me just lay out the kind of cooperation that we're going to need.  We need a strong Europeto bear its share of the burden, working with us on behalf of our collective security.  TheUnited States has an extraordinary military, the best the world has ever known, but thenature of today’s threats means we can’t deal with these challenges by ourselves.
  
Right now, the most urgent threat to our nations is ISIL, and that’s why we’re united in ourdetermination to destroy it.  And all 28 NATO allies are contributing to our coalition -- whetherit’s striking ISIL targets in Syria and Iraq, or supporting the air campaign, or training localforces in Iraq, or providing critical humanitarian aid.  And we continue to make progress,pushing ISIL back from territory that it controlled.
And just as I’ve approved additional support for Iraqi forces against ISIL, I’ve decided toincrease U.S. support for local forces fighting ISIL in Syria.  A small number of AmericanSpecial Operations Forces are already on the ground in Syria and their expertise has beencritical as local forces have driven ISIL out of key areas.  So given the success, I’ve approvedthe deployment of up 250 additional U.S. personnel in Syria, including Special Forces, to keepup this momentum.  They’re not going to be leading the fight on the ground, but they will beessential in providing the training and assisting local forces that continue to drive ISIL back.
So, make no mistake.  These terrorists will learn the same lesson as others before them have,which is, your hatred is no match for our nations united in the defense of our way of life.  Andjust as we remain relentless on the military front, we’re not going to give up on diplomacy toend the civil war in Syria, because the suffering of the Syrian people has to end, and thatrequires an effective political transition.
But this remains a difficult fight, and none of us can solve this problem by ourselves.  Even asEuropean countries make important contributions against ISIL, Europe, including NATO, canstill do more.  So I’ve spoken to Chancellor Merkel and I’ll be meeting later with the Presidentsof France and the Prime Ministers of Great Britain and of Italy.  In Syria and Iraq, we needmore nations contributing to the air campaign.  We need more nations contributing trainers tohelp build up local forces in Iraq.  We need more nations to contribute economic assistance toIraq so it can stabilize liberated areas and break the cycle of violent extremism so that ISILcannot come back.
These terrorists are doing everything in their power to strike our cities and kill our citizens, sowe need to do everything in our power to stop them.  And that includes closing gaps soterrorists can’t pull off attacks like those in Paris and Brussels.
Which brings me to one other point.  Europeans, like Americans, cherish your privacy.  Andmany are skeptical about governments collecting and sharing information, for good reason.That skepticism is healthy.  Germans remember their history of government surveillance -- sodo Americans, by the way, particularly those who were fighting on behalf of civil rights.
  
So it’s part of our democracies to want to make sure our governments are accountable.
But I want to say this to young people who value their privacy and spend a lot of time on theirphones:  The threat of terrorism is real.  In the United States, I’ve worked to reform oursurveillance programs to ensure that they’re consistent with the rule of law and upholding ourvalues, like privacy -- and, by the way, we include the privacy of people outside of the UnitedStates.  We care about Europeans’ privacy, not just Americans’ privacy.
But I also, in working on these issues, have come to recognize security and privacy don’t haveto be a contradiction.  We can protect both.  And we have to.  If we truly value our liberty,then we have to take the steps that are necessary to share information and intelligence withinEurope, as well as between the United States and Europe, to stop terrorists from traveling andcrossing borders and killing innocent people.
And as today’s diffuse threats evolve, our alliance has to evolve.  So we’re going to have aNATO summit this summer in Warsaw, and I will insist that all of us need to meet ourresponsibilities, united, together.  That means standing with the people of Afghanistan as theybuild their security forces and push back against violent extremism.  It means more ships inthe Aegean to shut down criminal networks who are profiting by smuggling desperate familiesand children.
And that said, NATO’s central mission is, and always will be, our solemn duty -- our Article 5commitment to our common defense.  That’s why we’ll continue to bolster the defense of ourfrontline allies in Poland and Romania and the Baltic states.
So we have to both make sure that NATO carries out its traditional mission, but also to meetthe threats of NATO’s southern flank.  That’s why we need to stay nimble, and make sure ourforces are interoperable, and invest in new capabilities like cyber defense and missiledefense.  And that’s why every NATO member should be contributing its full share -- 2percent of GDP -- towards our common security, something that doesn’t always happen.  AndI’ll be honest, sometimes Europe has been complacent about its own defense.
Just as we stand firm in our own defense, we have to uphold our most basic principles of ourinternational order, and that’s a principle that nations like Ukraine have the right to choosetheir own destiny.  Remember that it was Ukrainians on the Maidan, many of them your age,reaching out for a future with Europe that prompted Russia to send in its military.
  
After all that Europe endured in the 20th century, we must not allow borders to be redrawn bybrute force in the 21st century.  So we should keep helping Ukraine with its reforms toimprove its economy and consolidate its democracy and modernize its forces to protect itsindependence.
And I want good relations with Russia, and have invested a lot in good relations with Russia. But we need to keep sanctions on Russia in place until Russia fully implements the Minskagreements that Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande and others have worked so hard tomaintain, and provide a path for a political resolution of this issue.  And ultimately, it is myfervent hope that Russia recognizes that true greatness comes not from bullying neighbors,but by working with the world, which is the only way to deliver lasting economic growth andprogress to the Russian people.
Now, our collective security rests on a foundation of prosperity, so that brings me to mysecond point.  The world needs a prosperous and growing Europe -- not just a strong Europe,but a prosperous and growing Europe that generates good jobs and wages for its people.
As I mentioned before, the economic anxieties many feel today on both sides of the Atlanticare real.  The disruptive changes brought about by the global economy, unfortunately,sometimes are hitting certain groups, especially working-class communities, more heavily. And if neither the burdens, nor the benefits of our global economy are being fairy distributed,it’s no wonder that people rise up and reject globalization.  If there are too few winners andtoo many losers as the global economy integrates, people are going to push back.
So all of us in positions of power have a responsibility as leaders of government and businessand civil society to help people realize the promise of economic and security in this integratedeconomy.  And the good news is, we know how to do it.  Sometimes we just lack the politicalwill to do it.
In the United States, our economy is growing again, but the United States can’t be the soleengine of global growth.  And countries should not have to choose between responding tocrises and investing in their people.  So we need to pursue reforms to position us for long-
term prosperity, and support demand and invest in the future.  All of our countries, forexample, could be investing more in infrastructure.  All of our countries need to invest inscience and research and development that sparks new innovation and new industries.  All ofour countries have to invest in our young people, and make sure that they have the skills andthe training and the education they need to adapt to this rapidly changing world.
  
All of our countries need to worry about inequality, and make sure that workers are getting afair share of the incredible productivity that technology and global supply chains areproducing.
But if you’re really concerned about inequality, if you’re really concerned about the plight ofworkers, if you’re a progressive, it’s my firm belief that you can’t turn inward.  That’s not theright answer.   We have to keep increasing the trade and investment that supports jobs, aswe’re working to do between the United States and the EU.  We need to keep implementingreforms to our banking and financial systems so that the excesses and abuses that triggeredthe financial crisis never happen again.
But we can’t do that individually, nation by nation, because finance now is transnational.  Itmoves around too fast.  If we’re not coordinating between Europe and the United States andAsia, then it won’t work.
As the world has been reminded in recent weeks, we need to close loopholes that allowcorporations and wealthy individuals to avoid paying their fair share of taxes through taxhavens and tax avoidance, trillions of dollars that could be going towards pressing needs likeeducation and health care and infrastructure.  But to do that, we have to work together.
Here in Europe, as you work to strengthen your union -- including through labor and bankingreforms, and by ensuring growth across the Eurozone -- you will have the staunch support ofthe United States.  But you’re going to have to do it together, because your economies are toointegrated to try to solve these problems on your own.  And I want to repeat:  We have toconfront the injustice of widening economic inequality. But that is going to require collectivework, because capital is mobile, and if only a few countries are worrying about it, then a lot ofbusinesses will head toward places that don’t care about it quite as much.
For a lot of years, it was thought that countries had to choose between economic growth andeconomic inclusion.  Now we know the truth -- when wealth is increasingly concentratedamong the few at the top, it’s not only a moral challenge to us but it actually drags down acountry’s growth potential.  We need growth that is broad and lifts everybody up.  We needtax policies that do right by working families.
And those like me who support European unity and free trade also have a profoundresponsibility to champion strong protections for workers -- a living wage and the right toorganize, and a strong safety net, and a commitment to protect consumers and theenvironment upon which we all depend.
  
If we really want to reduce inequality, we've got to make sure everyone who works hard getsa fair shot -- and that's especially true for young people like you -- with education, and jobtraining, and quality health care and good wages.  And that includes, by the way, making surethat there's equal pay for equal work for women.
The point is, we have to reform many of our economies.  But the answer to reform is not tostart cutting ourselves off from each other.  Rather, it's to work together.  And this brings meback to where I began.  The world depends upon a democratic Europe that upholds theprinciples of pluralism and diversity and freedom that are our common creed.  As freepeoples, we cannot allow the forces that I’ve described -- fears about security or economicanxieties -- to undermine our commitment to the universal values that are the source of ourstrength.
Democracy, I understand, can be messy.  It can be slow.  It can be frustrating.  I know that. I have to deal with a Congress.    We have to constantly work to make sure government is nota collection of distant, detached institutions, but is connected and responsive to the everydayconcerns of our people.  There's no doubt that how a united Europe works together can beimproved.  But look around the world -- at authoritarian governments and theocracies thatrule by fear and oppression -- there is no doubt that democracy is still the most just andeffective form of government ever created.
And when I talk about democracy, I don't just mean elections, because there are a number ofcountries where people get 70, 80 percent of the vote, but they control all the media and thejudiciary.  And civil society organizations and NGOs can't organize, and have to be registered,and are intimidated.  I mean real democracy, the sort that we see here in Europe and in theUnited States.  So we have to be vigilant in defense of these pillars of democracy -- not justelections, but rule of law, as well as fair elections, a free press, vibrant civil societies wherecitizens can work for change.
And we should be suspicious of those who claim to have the interests of Europe at heart andyet don't practice the very values that are essential to Europe, that have made freedom inEurope so real.
So, yes, these are unsettling times.  And when the future is uncertain, there seems to be aninstinct in our human nature to withdraw to the perceived comfort and security of our owntribe, our own sect, our own nationality, people who look like us, sound like us.  But in today'sworld, more than any time in human history, that is a false comfort.
  
It pits people against one another because of what they look or how they pray or who theylove.  And yet, we know where that kind of twisted thinking can lead.  It can lead tooppression.  It can lead to segregation and internment camps.  And to the Shoah andSrebrenica.
In the United States, we’ve long wrestled with questions of race and integration, and we do tothis day.  And we still have a lot of work to do.  But our progress allows somebody like me tonow stand here as President of the United States.  That's because we committed ourselves toa larger ideal, one based on a creed -- not a race, not a nationality -- a set of principles;truths that we held to be self-evident that all men were created equal.  And now, as Europeconfronts questions of immigration and religion and assimilation, I want you to remember thatour countries are stronger, they are more secure and more successful when we welcome andintegrate people of all backgrounds and faith, and make them feel as one.  And that includesour fellow citizens who are Muslim.
Look, the sudden arrival of so many people from beyond our borders, especially when theircultures are very different, that can be daunting.  We have immigration issues in the UnitedStates as well, along our southern border of the United States and from people arriving fromall around the world who get a visa and decide they want to stay.  And I know the politics ofimmigration and refugees is hard.  It's hard everywhere, in every country.  And just as ahandful of neighborhoods shouldn't bear all the burden of refugee resettlement, neither shouldany one nation.  All of us have to step up, all of us have to share this responsibility.  Thatincludes the United States.
But even as we take steps that are required to ensure our security; even as we help Turkeyand Greece cope with this influx in a way that is safe and humane; even as Chancellor Merkeland other European leaders work for an orderly immigration and resettlement process, ratherthan a disorderly one; even as we all need to collectively do more to invest in the sustainabledevelopment and governance in those nations from which people are fleeing so that they cansucceed and prosper in their own countries, and so that we can reduce the conflicts that causeso much of the refugee crisis around the world -- Chancellor Merkel and others haveeloquently reminded us that we cannot turn our backs on our fellow human beings who arehere now, and need our help now.   We have to uphold our values, not just when it’s easy, butwhen it’s hard.
  
In Germany, more than anywhere else, we learned that what the world needs is not morewalls.  We can't define ourselves by the barriers we build to keep people out or to keep peoplein.  At every crossroads in our history, we've moved forward when we acted on those timelessideals that tells us to be open to one another, and to respect the dignity of every humanbeing.
And I think of so many Germans and people across Europe who have welcomed migrants intotheir homes, because, as one woman in Berlin said, “we needed to do something.”  Just thathuman impulse to help.  And I think of the refugee who said, “I want to teach my kids thevalue of working.”  That human impulse to see the next generation have hope.  All of us canbe guided by the empathy and compassion of His Holiness, Pope Francis, who said “refugeesare not numbers, they are people who have faces, names, stories, and [they] need to betreated as such.” 
And I know it may seem easy for me to say all this, living on the other side of the ocean.  AndI know that some will call it blind hope when I say that I am confident that the forces thatbind Europe together are ultimately much stronger than those trying to pull you apart.  Buthope is not blind when it is rooted in the memory of all that you've already overcome -- yourparents, your grandparents.
So I say to you, the people of Europe, don't forget who you are.  You are the heirs to astruggle for freedom.  You're the Germans, the French, the Dutch, the Belgians, theLuxembourgers, the Italians -- and yes, the British -- who rose above old divisions and putEurope on the path to union.
You’re the Poles of Solidarity and the Czechs and Slovaks who waged a Velvet Revolution. You’re the Latvians, and Lithuanians and Estonians who linked hands in a great human chainof freedom.  You’re the Hungarians and Austrians who cut through borders of barbed wire. And you’re the Berliners who, on that November night, finally tore down that wall.  You’re thepeople of Madrid and London who faced down bombings and refused to give in to fear.
And you are the Parisians who, later this year, plan to reopen the Bataclan.  You’re the peopleof Brussels, in a square of flowers and flags, including one Belgian who offered a message --we need “more.”  More understanding.  More dialogue.  More humanity.
That's who you are.  United, together.  You are Europe -- “United in diversity.”   Guided by theideals that have lit the world, and stronger when you stand as one.
  
As you go forward, you can be confident that your greatest ally and friend, the United Statesof America, stands with you, shoulder-to-shoulder, now and forever.  Because a united Europe-- once the dream of a few -- remains the hope of the many and a necessity for us all.
Thank you very much.  Thank you.
