To President Bush and Mrs. Bush; to President Clinton and now-former Secretary Clinton; toPresident George H.W. Bush and Mrs. Bush; to President and Mrs. Carter; to current andformer world leaders and all the distinguished guests here today: Michelle and I are honoredto be with you to mark this historic occasion.
This is a Texas-sized party. And that’s worthy of what we’re here to do today: honor the lifeand legacy of the 43rd President of the United States, George W. Bush.
When all the living former Presidents are together, it’s also a -- a special day for ourdemocracy. We’ve been called "the world’s most exclusive club" -- and we do have a prettynice clubhouse. But the truth is, our club is more like a support group.
The last time we all got together was just before I took office -- and I needed that. Because aseach of these leaders will tell you, no matter how much you may think you’re ready to assumethe office of the presidency, it’s impossible to truly understand the nature of the job until it’syours, until you’re sitting at that desk.
  
And that’s why every President gains a greater appreciation for all of those who served beforethem; for the leaders from both parties who've taken on the momentous challenges and feltthe enormous weight of the nation on their shoulders. And for me, that appreciation verymuch extends to President Bush.
The first thing I found in that desk the day I took office was a -- a letter from George, and onethat demonstrated his compassion and his generosity. For he knew that I would come to learnwhat he had learned -- that being President, above all, is a humbling job. There are momentswhere you make mistakes.
There are times where you wish you could turn back the clock. And what I know is true aboutPresident Bush, and I hope my successor will say about me, is that we love this country andwe do our best.
Now, in the past, President Bush has said it’s impossible to pass judgment on his presidencywhile he’s still alive. So maybe this is a little bit premature. But even now, there are certainthings that we know for certain.
We know about the son who was raised by two strong, loving parents in Midland, famous --famously inheriting, as he says, "my daddy’s eyes and my mother’s mouth"; the young boywho once came home after a trip to a museum and proudly presented his horrified motherwith a small dinosaur tailbone he had smuggled home in his pocket.
I’ll bet that went over great with Barbara.
We know about the young man who met the love of his life at a dinner party, ditching hisplans to go to bed early and instead talking with the brilliant and charming Laura Welch lateinto the night.
We know about the father who raised two remarkable, caring, beautiful daughters, even afterthey tried to discourage him from running for President, saying, "Dad, you’re not as cool asyou think you are." Mr. President, I can relate. And now we see President Bush, thegrandfather, just beginning to spoil his brand-new granddaughter. 
So we know President Bush the man. And what President Clinton said is absolutely true -- toknow the man is to like the man, because he’s comfortable in his own skin.  He knows who heis. He doesn’t put on any pretenses. He takes his job seriously, but he doesn’t take himselftoo seriously. He is a good man.
But we also know something about George Bush the leader. As we walk through this library,obviously we’re reminded of the incredible strength and resolve that came through thatbullhorn as he stood amid the rubble and the ruins of Ground Zero, promising to deliverjustice to those who had sought to destroy our way of life. 
  
We remember the compassion that he showed by leading the global fight against HIV/AIDSand malaria, helping to save millions of lives and reminding people in some of the poorestcorners of the globe that America cares and that we’re here to help.
We remember his commitment to reaching across the aisle to unlikely allies like Ted Kennedy,because he believed that we had to reform our schools in ways that help every child learn, notjust some; that we have to repair a broken immigration system; and that this progress is onlypossible when we do it together.
Seven years ago, President Bush restarted an important conversation by speaking with theAmerican people about our history as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. And eventhough comprehensive immigration reform has taken a little longer than any of us expected, Iam hopeful that this year, with the help of Speaker Boehner and some of the senators andmembers of Congress who are here today, that we bring it home -- for our families, and oureconomy, and our security, and for this incredible country that we love. And if we do that, itwill be in large part thanks to all the hard work of President George W. Bush.
And finally, a President bears no greater decision and no more solemn burden than serving asCommander-in-Chief of the greatest military that the world has ever known. As PresidentBush himself has said, "America must and will keep its word to the men and women who havegiven us so much." So even as we Americans may at times disagree on matters of foreignpolicy, we share a profound respect and reverence for the men and women of our military andtheir families. And we are united in our determination to comfort the families of the fallen andto care for those who wear the uniform of the United States.
On the flight back from Russia, after negotiating with Nikita Khrushchev at the height of theCold War, President Kennedy's secretary found a small slip of paper on which the Presidenthad written a favorite saying: "I know there is a God. And I see a storm coming. If he has aplace for me, I believe I am ready." 
No one can be completely ready for this office. But America needs leaders who are willing toface the storm head on, even as they pray for God's strength and wisdom so that they can dowhat they believe is right. And that’s what the leaders with whom I share this stage have alldone. That’s what President George W. Bush chose to do. That’s why I'm honored to be partof today's celebration.
Mr. President, for your service, for your courage, for your sense of humor, and, most of all, foryour love of country: Thank you very much.
From all the citizens of the United States of America, God bless you.
And God bless these United States.
