Good morning, everybody.  I've just been briefed by my national security team, including FBIDirector Mueller, Attorney General Holder, Secretary Napolitano, and my Counterterrorism andHomeland Security Advisor Lisa Monaco, on the attacks in Boston.  We continue to mobilizeand deploy all appropriate law enforcement resources to protect our citizens, and toinvestigate and to respond to this attack.
Obviously our first thoughts this morning are with the victims, their families, and the city ofBoston.  We know that two explosions gravely wounded dozens of Americans, and took thelives of others, including a 8-year-old boy.
This was a heinous and cowardly act.  And given what we now know about what took place,the FBI is investigating it as an act of terrorism.  Any time bombs are used to target innocentcivilians it is an act of terror.  What we don’t yet know, however, is who carried out thisattack, or why; whether it was planned and executed by a terrorist organization, foreign ordomestic, or was the act of a malevolent individual.  That's what we don't yet know.  Andclearly, we’re at the beginning of our investigation.
It will take time to follow every lead and determine what happened.  But we will find out.  Wewill find whoever harmed our citizens and we will bring them to justice.
  
We also know this -- the American people refuse to be terrorized.  Because what the worldsaw yesterday in the aftermath of the explosions were stories of heroism and kindness, andgenerosity and love: Exhausted runners who kept running to the nearest hospital to giveblood, and those who stayed to tend to the wounded, some tearing off their own clothes tomake tourniquets.  The first responders who ran into the chaos to save lives.  The men andwomen who are still treating the wounded at some of the best hospitals in the world, and themedical students who hurried to help, saying “When we heard, we all came in.” The priestswho opened their churches and ministered to the hurt and the fearful.  And the good people ofBoston who opened their homes to the victims of this attack and those shaken by it.
So if you want to know who we are, what America is, how we respond to evil -- that’s it. Selflessly.  Compassionately.  Unafraid.
In the coming days, we will pursue every effort to get to the bottom of what happened.  Andwe will continue to remain vigilant.  I’ve directed my administration to take appropriatesecurity measures to protect the American people.  And this is a good time for all of us toremember that we all have a part to play in alerting authorities -- if you see somethingsuspicious, speak up.
I have extraordinary confidence in the men and women of the FBI, the Boston PoliceDepartment, and the other agencies that responded so heroically and effectively in theaftermath of yesterday’s events.  I’m very grateful for the leadership of Governor Patrick andMayor Menino. And I know that even as we protect our people and aggressively pursue thisinvestigation, the people of Boston will continue to respond in the same proud and heroic waythat they have thus far -- and their fellow Americans will be right there with them.
Thank you very much.  And you can expect further briefings from our law enforcementofficials as the day goes on.  When we have more details, they will be disclosed.  What I’veindicated to you is what we know now. We know it was bombs that were set off.  We knowthat obviously they did some severe damage.  We do not know who did them.  We do notknow whether this was an act of an organization or an individual or individuals.  We don’thave a sense of motive yet.  So everything else at this point is speculation.  But as we receivemore information, as the FBI has more information, as our out counterterrorism teams havemore information, we will make sure to keep you and the American people posted.
Thank you very much, everybody.
