Good afternoon.  Earlier today, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of theAffordable Care Act -- the name of the health care reform we passed two years ago.  In doingso, they've reaffirmed a fundamental principle that here in America -- in the wealthiest nationon Earth – no illness or accident should lead to any family’s financial ruin. 
I know there will be a lot of discussion today about the politics of all this, about who won andwho lost.  That’s how these things tend to be viewed here in Washington.  But that discussioncompletely misses the point.  Whatever the politics, today’s decision was a victory for peopleall over this country whose lives will be more secure because of this law and the SupremeCourt’s decision to uphold it.
And because this law has a direct impact on so many Americans, I want to take thisopportunity to talk about exactly what it means for you. 
First, if you’re one of the more than 250 million Americans who already have health insurance,you will keep your health insurance -- this law will only make it more secure and moreaffordable.  Insurance companies can no longer impose lifetime limits on the amount of careyou receive.  They can no longer discriminate against children with preexisting conditions. They can no longer drop your coverage if you get sick.  They can no longer jack up yourpremiums without reason.
  
They are required to provide free preventive care like check-ups and mammograms -- aprovision that's already helped 54 million Americans with private insurance.  And by thisAugust, nearly 13 million of you will receive a rebate from your insurance company because itspent too much on things like administrative costs and CEO bonuses, and not enough on yourhealth care. 
There’s more.  Because of the Affordable Care Act, young adults under the age of 26 are ableto stay on their parent's health care plans -- a provision that's already helped 6 million youngAmericans.  And because of the Affordable Care Act, seniors receive a discount on theirprescription drugs -- a discount that's already saved more than 5 million seniors on Medicareabout $600 each.
All of this is happening because of the Affordable Care Act. These provisions provide common-
sense protections for middle class families, and they enjoy broad popular support.  And thanksto today’s decision, all of these benefits and protections will continue for Americans whoalready have health insurance.   
Now, if you’re one of the 30 million Americans who don’t yet have health insurance, starting in2014 this law will offer you an array of quality, affordable, private health insurance plans tochoose from.  Each state will take the lead in designing their own menu of options, and ifstates can come up with even better ways of covering more people at the same quality andcost, this law allows them to do that, too.  And I’ve asked Congress to help speed up thatprocess, and give states this flexibility in year one. 
Once states set up these health insurance marketplaces, known as exchanges, insurancecompanies will no longer be able to discriminate against any American with a preexistinghealth condition.  They won’t be able to charge you more just because you’re a woman.  Theywon’t be able to bill you into bankruptcy. If you’re sick, you’ll finally have the same chance toget quality, affordable health care as everyone else.  And if you can’t afford the premiums,you'll receive a credit that helps pay for it. 
Today, the Supreme Court also upheld the principle that people who can afford healthinsurance should take the responsibility to buy health insurance.  This is important for tworeasons. 
First, when uninsured people who can afford coverage get sick, and show up at theemergency room for care, the rest of us end up paying for their care in the form of higherpremiums. 
And second, if you ask insurance companies to cover people with preexisting conditions, butdon’t require people who can afford it to buy their own insurance, some folks might wait untilthey’re sick to buy the care they need -- which would also drive up everybody else’spremiums.
  
That’s why, even though I knew it wouldn’t be politically popular, and resisted the idea when Iran for this office, we ultimately included a provision in the Affordable Care Act that peoplewho can afford to buy health insurance should take the responsibility to do so.  In fact, thisidea has enjoyed support from members of both parties, including the current Republicannominee for President.
Still, I know the debate over this law has been divisive.  I respect the very real concerns thatmillions of Americans have shared.  And I know a lot of coverage through this health caredebate has focused on what it means politically. Well, it should be pretty clear by now that Ididn’t do this because it was good politics.  I did it because I believed it was good for thecountry.  I did it because I believed it was good for the American people.
There’s a framed letter that hangs in my office right now.  It was sent to me during the healthcare debate by a woman named Natoma Canfield.  For years and years, Natoma dideverything right.  She bought health insurance.  She paid her premiums on time.  But 18years ago, Natoma was diagnosed with cancer.  And even though she’d been cancer-free formore than a decade, her insurance company kept jacking up her rates, year after year.  Anddespite her desire to keep her coverage -- despite her fears that she would get sick again --she had to surrender her health insurance, and was forced to hang her fortunes on chance. 
I carried Natoma’s story with me every day of the fight to pass this law.  It reminded me of allthe Americans, all across the country, who have had to worry not only about getting sick, butabout the cost of getting well. 
Natoma is well today.  And because of this law, there are other Americans -- other sons anddaughters, brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers -- who will not have to hang theirfortunes on chance.  These are the Americans for whom we passed this law. 
The highest Court in the land has now spoken.  We will continue to implement this law.  Andwe'll work together to improve on it where we can.  But what we won’t do -- what the countrycan’t afford to do -- is refight the political battles of two years ago, or go back to the waythings were. 
With today’s announcement, it’s time for us to move forward -- to implement and, wherenecessary, improve on this law.  And now is the time to keep our focus on the most urgentchallenge of our time:  putting people back to work, paying down our debt, and building aneconomy where people can have confidence that if they work hard, they can get ahead. 
But today, I’m as confident as ever that when we look back five years from now, or 10 yearsfrom now, or 20 years from now, we’ll be better off because we had the courage to pass thislaw and keep moving forward. 
Thank you.  God bless you, and God bless America.
