Good morning, everybody. 
Yesterday, Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 took off from Amsterdam and was shot down overUkraine near the Russian border.  Nearly 300 innocent lives were taken -- men, women,children, infants -- who had nothing to do with the crisis in Ukraine.  Their deaths are anoutrage of unspeakable proportions.
We know at least one American citizen, Quinn Lucas Schansman, was killed.  Our thoughtsand prayers are with his family for this terrible loss.
Yesterday, I spoke with the leaders of Ukraine, Malaysia, and the Netherlands.  I told themthat our thoughts and prayers are with all the families and that the American people standwith them during this difficult time.  Later today, I’ll be speaking to Prime Minister Abbott ofAustralia, which also suffered a terrible loss.
By far, the country that lost the most people on board the plane was the Netherlands.  Fromthe days of our founding, the Dutch have been close friends and stalwart allies of the UnitedStates of America.  And today, I want the Dutch people to know that we stand with you,shoulder to shoulder, in our grief and in our absolute determination to get to the bottom ofwhat happened.
Here’s what we know so far.
  
Evidence indicates that the plane was shot down by a surface-to-air missile that was launchedfrom an area that is controlled by Russian-backed separatists inside of Ukraine.  We also knowthat this is not the first time a plane has been shot down in eastern Ukraine.  Over the lastseveral weeks, Russian-backed separatists have shot down a Ukrainian transport plane and aUkrainian helicopter, and they claimed responsibility for shooting down a Ukrainian fighter jet.Moreover, we know that these separatists have received a steady flow of support fromRussia.  This includes arms and training.  It includes heavy weapons, and it includes anti-
aircraft weapons. 
Here’s what must happen now.  This was a global tragedy.  An Asian airliner was destroyed inEuropean skies, filled with citizens from many countries.  So there has to be a credibleinternational investigation into what happened.  The U.N. Security Council has endorsed thisinvestigation, and we will hold all its members -- including Russia -- to their word.  In order tofacilitate that investigation, Russia, pro-Russian separatists, and Ukraine must adhere to animmediate cease-fire.  Evidence must not be tampered with.  Investigators need to access thecrash site.  And the solemn task of returning those who were lost on board the plane to theirloved ones needs to go forward immediately.
The United States stands ready to provide any assistance that is necessary.  We’ve alreadyoffered the support of the FBI and the National Transportation Safety Board, which hasexperience in working with international partners on these types of investigations.  They areon their way, personnel from the FBI and the National Transportation Safety Board. 
In the coming hours and days, I’ll continue to be in close contact with leaders from around theworld as we respond to this catastrophe.  Our immediate focus will be on recovering thosewho were lost, investigating exactly what happened, and putting forward the facts. 
I want to point out there will likely be misinformation as well.  I think it's very important forfolks to sift through what is factually based and what is simply speculation.  No one can denythe truth that is revealed in the awful images that we all have seen.  And the eyes of theworld are on eastern Ukraine, and we are going to make sure that the truth is out.
More broadly, I think it's important for us to recognize that this outrageous event underscoresthat it is time for peace and security to be restored in Ukraine.  For months, we’ve supporteda pathway to peace, and the Ukrainian government has reached out to all Ukrainians, putforward a peace plan, and lived up to a cease-fire, despite repeated violations by theseparatists -- violations that took the lives of Ukrainian soldiers and personnel.
Moreover, time and again, Russia has refused to take the concrete steps necessary todeescalate the situation.  I spoke to President Putin yesterday in the wake of additionalsanctions that we had imposed.  He said he wasn’t happy with them, and I told him that wehave been very clear from the outset that we want Russia to take the path that would result inpeace in Ukraine, but so far at least, Russia has failed to take that path.
  
Instead, it has continued to violate Ukrainian sovereignty and to support violent separatists. It has also failed to use its influence to press the separatists to abide by a cease-fire.  That’swhy, together with our allies, we’ve imposed growing costs on Russia.
So now is, I think, a somber and appropriate time for all of us to step back and take a hardlook at what has happened.  Violence and conflict inevitably lead to unforeseenconsequences.  Russia, these separatists, and Ukraine all have the capacity to put an end tothe fighting.  Meanwhile, the United States is going to continue to lead efforts within the worldcommunity to de-escalate the situation; to stand up for the sovereignty and territorialintegrity of Ukraine; and to support the people of Ukraine as they courageously work tostrengthen their democracy and make their own decisions about how they should moveforward.
Before I take just a couple of questions let me remark on one other issue.  This morning, Ispoke with Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel about the situation in Gaza.  We discussedIsrael’s military operation in Gaza, including its efforts to stop the threat of terrorist infiltrationthrough tunnels into Israel.  I reaffirmed my strong support for Israel’s right to defend itself. No nation should accept rockets being fired into its borders, or terrorists tunneling into itsterritory.  In fact, while I was having the conversation with Prime Minister Netanyahu, sirenswent off in Tel Aviv.
I also made clear that the United States, and our friends and allies, are deeply concernedabout the risks of further escalation and the loss of more innocent life.  And that’s why we’veindicated, although we support military efforts by the Israelis to make sure that rockets arenot being fired into their territory, we also have said that our understanding is the currentmilitary ground operations are designed to deal with the tunnels, and we are hopeful thatIsrael will continue to approach this process in a way that minimizes civilian casualties andthat all of us are working hard to return to the cease-fire that was reached in November of2012. 
Secretary Kerry is working to support Egypt’s initiative to pursue that outcome.  I told PrimeMinister Netanyahu that John is prepared to travel to the region following additionalconsultations.
Let me close by making one additional comment.  On board Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17,there were apparently nearly 100 researchers and advocates traveling to an internationalconference in Australia dedicated to combating AIDS/HIV.  These were men and women whohad dedicated their own lives to saving the lives of others and they were taken from us in asenseless act of violence.
In this world today, we shouldn’t forget that in the midst of conflict and killing, there arepeople like these -- people who are focused on what can be built rather than what can bedestroyed; people who are focused on how they can help people that they’ve never met;people who define themselves not by what makes them different from other people but by the
  
humanity that we hold in common.  It’s important for us to lift them up and to affirm theirlives.  And it’s time for us to heed their example. 
The United States of America is going to continue to stand for the basic principle that peoplehave the right to live as they choose; that nations have the right to determine their owndestiny; and that when terrible events like this occur, the international community stands onthe side of justice and on the side of truth. 
So with that, let me take just a couple questions.  I’ll start with you, Julie.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Just on a technical matter, does the U.S. believe thatthis passenger jet was targeted, or that those people who shot it down may have been goingafter a military -- thought they were going after a military aircraft?  And more broadly, thisincident does seem to escalate the crisis in Ukraine to a level we haven’t seen before.  Doesthat change your calculus in terms of what the U.S. and perhaps Europe should be doing interms of a response?
President Obama:  Well, I think it’s too early for us to be able to guess what the intentionsof those who might have launched this surface-to-air missile might have had.  Theinvestigation is going to be ongoing, and I think what we’ll see is additional informationsurfacing over the next 24 hours, 72 hours, the next week, the next month.
What we know right now, what we have confidence in saying right now is that a surface-to-airmissile was fired and that's what brought the jet down.  We know -- or we have confidence insaying that that shot was taken within a territory that is controlled by the Russianseparatists. 
But I think it’s very important for us to make sure that we don't get out ahead of the facts. And at this point, in terms of identifying specifically what individual or group of individuals orpersonnel ordered the strike, how it came about, those are things that I think are still going tobe subject to additional information that we’re going to be gathering.  And we’re working withthe entire international community to make sure that the focus is on getting to the bottom ofthis thing and being truthful.
And my concern is obviously that there’s been a lot of misinformation generated in easternUkraine generally.  This should snap everybody’s heads to attention and make sure that wedon't have time for propaganda, we don't have time for games.  We need to know exactlywhat happened.  And everybody needs to make sure that we’re holding accountable thosewho committed this outrage.
With respect to the second question, as you’re aware, before this terrible incident happenedwe had already ratcheted up sanctions against Russia.  And I think the concern not just ofRussian officials but of the markets about the impact that this could have on the Russianeconomy is there for all to see.
  
I made clear to President Putin that our preferred path is to resolve this diplomatically.  Butthat means that he and the Russian government have to make a strategic decision:  Are theygoing to continue to support violent separatists whose intent is to undermine the governmentof Ukraine?  Or are they prepared to work with the government of Ukraine to arrive at acease-fire and a peace that takes into account the interests of all Ukrainians?
There has been some improved language at times over the last month coming from theKremlin and coming from President Putin, but what we have not seen is an actual transitionand different actions that would give us confidence that that's the direction that they want totake.
And we will continue to make clear that as Russia engages in efforts that are supporting theseparatists, that we have the capacity to increase the costs that we impose on them.  And wewill do so.  Not because we’re interested in hurting Russia for the sake of hurting Russia, butbecause we believe in standing up for the basic principle that a country’s sovereignty andterritorial integrity has to be respected, and it is not the United States or Russia or Germanyor any other country that should be deciding what happens in that country.
Question:  At this point do you see any U.S. military role that could be effective?
President Obama:  We don't see a U.S. military role beyond what we’ve already been doingin working with our NATO partners and some of the Baltic States, giving them reassurancesthat we are prepared to do whatever is required to meet our alliance obligations.
Steve Holland.
Question:  Sir, thank you.  How much blame for this do you put on President Putin?  And willyou use this incident now to push the Europeans for stronger action?
President Obama:  We don't exactly know what happened yet, and I don't want to, as I saidbefore, get out ahead of the facts.  But what I do know is, is that we have seen a ticking up ofviolence in eastern Ukraine that, despite the efforts of the Ukrainian government to abide by acease-fire and to reach out and agree to negotiations, including with the separatists, that hasbeen rebuffed by these separatists.  We know that they are heavily armed and that they aretrained.  And we know that that’s not an accident.  That is happening because of Russiansupport.
So it is not possible for these separatists to function the way they’re functioning, to have theequipment that they have -- set aside what’s happened with respect to the Malaysian Airlines-- a group of separatists can’t shoot down military transport planes or, they claim, shoot downfighter jets without sophisticated equipment and sophisticated training.  And that is comingfrom Russia.
  
So we don’t yet know exactly what happened with respect to the Malaysian Airlines, althoughobviously we’re beginning to draw some conclusions given the nature of the shot that wasfired.  There are only certain types of anti-aircraft missiles that can reach up 30,000 feet andshoot down a passenger jet.  We have increasing confidence that it came from areascontrolled by the separatists.  But without having a definitive judgment on those issues yet,what we do know is, is that the violence that’s taking place there is facilitated in part -- inlarge part -- because of Russian support.  And they have the ability to move those separatistsin a different direction.
If Mr. Putin makes a decision that we are not going to allow heavy armaments and the flow offighters into Ukraine across the Ukrainian-Russian border, then it will stop.  And if it stops,then the separatists will still have the capacity to enter into negotiations and try to arrive atthe sort of political accommodations that Mr. Putin himself says he wants to see.  He has themost control over that situation, and so far, at least, he has not exercised it.
Question: Tougher sanctions in Europe -- will you push for them?
President Obama:  Well, I think that this certainly will be a wake-up call for Europe and theworld that there are consequences to an escalating conflict in eastern Ukraine; that it is notgoing to be localized, it is not going to be contained.  What we’ve seen here is -- just in onecountry alone, our great allies, the Dutch, 150 or more of their citizens being killed.  And that,I think, sadly brings home the degree to which the stakes are high for Europe, not simply forthe Ukrainian people, and that we have to be firm in our resolve in making sure that we aresupporting Ukraine in its efforts to bring about a just cease-fire and that we can move towardsa political solution to this.
I’m going to make this the last question.  Lisa Lerer, Bloomberg.
Question:  Do we know yet if there were other Americans on board beyond the person youmentioned?  And how do you prevent stricter restrictions, economic sanctions from shockingthe global economy and --
President Obama:  We have been pretty methodical over the last 24 hours in workingthrough the flight manifest and identifying which passengers might have had a U.S. passport. At this point, the individual that I mentioned is the sole person that we can definitively saywas a U.S. or dual citizen. 
Because events are moving so quickly, I don’t want to say with absolute certainty that theremight not be additional Americans, but at this stage, having worked through the list, been incontact with the Malaysian government, which processed the passports as folks wereboarding, this is our best assessment of the number of Americans that were killed.  Obviouslythat does nothing to lessen our outrage about all those families.  Regardless of nationality, itis a heartbreaking event.
  
With respect to the effect of sanctions on the economy, we have consistently tried to tailorthese sanctions in ways that would have an impact on Russia, on their economy, on theirinstitutions or individuals that are aiding and abetting in the activities that are taking place ineastern Ukraine, while minimizing the impacts on not only the U.S. economy but the globaleconomy. 
It is a relevant consideration that we have to keep in mind.  The world economy is integrated;Russia is a large economy; there’s a lot of financial flows between Russia and the rest of theworld.  But we feel confident that at this point the sanctions that we’ve put in place areimposing a cost on Russia, that their overall impact on the global economy is minimal.  It issomething that we have to obviously pay close attention to, but I think Treasury, inconsultation with our European partners, have done a good job so far on that issue.
Thank you very much, everybody.
