Good morning, everybody. I hope you all had a wonderful Thanksgiving.
Last week, we announced our economic team, which is working as we speak to craft anEconomic Recovery Program to create jobs and grow our struggling economy. Today, VicePresident-elect Biden and I are pleased to announce our national security team.
The national security challenges we face are just as grave -- and just as urgent -- as oureconomic crisis. We are fighting two wars. Our old conflicts remain unresolved, and newlyassertive powers have put strains on the international system. The spread of nuclear weaponsraises the peril that the world’s deadliest technologies could fall into dangerous hands. Ourdependence on foreign oil empowers authoritarian governments and endangers our planet.

America must also be strong at home to be strong abroad. We need to provide education andopportunity to all our citizens, so every American can compete with anyone, anywhere. Andour economic power must sustain our military strength, our diplomatic leverage, and ourglobal leadership.
The common thread linking these challenges is the fundamental reality that in the 21stcentury, our destiny is shared with the world's. From our markets to our security, from ourpublic health to our climate, we must act with the understanding that, now more than ever,we have a stake in what happens across the globe. And as we learned so painfully on 9/11,terror cannot be contained by borders, nor safety provided by oceans alone.
Last week, we were reminded of this threat once again when terrorists took the lives of sixAmerican among nearly 200 victims in Mumbai. In the world we seek, there is no place forthose who kill innocent civilians to advance hateful extremism. This weekend, I told PrimeMinister Singh of India that Americans stand with the people of India in this dark time. And Iam confident that India's great democracy is more resilient than killers who would tear itdown.
And so, in this uncertain world, the time has come for a new beginning -- a new dawn ofAmerican leadership to overcome the challenges of the 21st century, and to seize theopportunities embedded in those challenges. We will strengthen our capacity to defeat ourenemies and support our friends. We will renew old alliances and forge new and enduringpartnerships. We will show the world once more that America is relentless in the defense ofour people, steady in advancing our interests, and committed to the ideals that shine as abeacon to the world: democracy and justice; opportunity and unyielding hope -- becauseAmerican values are America’s greatest export to the world.
To succeed, we must pursue a new strategy that skillfully uses, balances, and integrates allelements of American power: our military and diplomacy; our intelligence and lawenforcement; our economy and the power of our moral example. The team that we'veassembled here today is uniquely suited to do just that.
In their past service and plans for the future, these men and women represent all of thoseelements of American power, and the very best of the American example. They've served inuniform and as diplomats; they have worked as legislators, law enforcement officials, andexecutives. They share my pragmatism about the use of power, and my sense of purposeabout America's role as a leader in the world.
I have known Hillary Clinton as a friend, a colleague, a source of counsel, and as a campaignopponent. She possesses an extraordinary intelligence and a remarkable work ethic. I amproud that she will be our next Secretary of State. She is an American of tremendous staturewho will have my complete confidence, who knows many of the world's leaders, who willcommand respect in every capitol, and who will clearly have the ability to advance ourinterests around the world.

Hillary’s appointment is a sign to friend and foe of the seriousness of my commitment torenew American diplomacy and restore our alliances. There is much to do -- from preventingthe spread of nuclear weapons to Iran and North Korea, to seeking a lasting peace betweenIsrael and the Palestinians, to strengthening international institutions. I have no doubt thatHillary Clinton is the right person to lead our State Department, and to work with me intackling this ambitious foreign policy agenda.
At a time when we face unprecedented transition amidst two wars, I've have asked RobertGates to continue as Secretary of Defense, and I'm pleased that he's accepted. Two yearsago, he took over the Pentagon at a difficult time. He restored accountability. He won theconfidence of military commanders and the trust of our brave men and women in uniform, aswell as their families. He earned the respect of members of Congress on both sides of the aislefor his pragmatism and competence. He knows that we need a sustainable national securitystrategy -- and that includes a bipartisan consensus at home.
As I said throughout the campaign, I will be giving Secretary Gates and our military a newmission as soon as I take office: responsibly ending the war in Iraq through a successfultransition to Iraqi control. We will also ensure that we have the strategy and resources tosucceed against al Qaeda and the Taliban. As Bob said not too long ago, Afghanistan is wherethe war on terror began, and it is where it must end. And going forward, we will continue tomake the investments necessary to strengthen our military and increase our ground forces todefeat the threats of the 21st century.
Eric Holder has the talent and commitment to succeed as Attorney General from his first dayon the job, which is even more important in a transition that demands vigilance. He hasdistinguished himself as a prosecutor, a judge, and a senior official, and he is deeply familiarwith the law enforcement challenges we face -- from terrorism to counter-intelligence, fromwhite collar crime to public corruption. Eric also has the combination of toughness andindependence that we need at the Justice Department. Let me be clear: The Attorney Generalserves the American people. And I have every expectation that Eric will protect our people,uphold the public trust, and adhere to our Constitution.
Janet Napolitano offers the experience and executive skills we need in the next Secretary ofHomeland Security. She has spent her career protecting people -- as a US Attorney, anAttorney General, and as the Governor of Arizona. She understands the need for aDepartment of Homeland Security that has the capacity to help prevent terrorist attacks andrespond to catastrophe -- be it manmade or natural. Janet assumes this critical role havinglearned the lessons -- some of them painful -- of the last several years, from 9/11 to Katrina.She insists on competence and accountability. She knows firsthand the need to have a partnerin Washington that works well with state and local governments. She understands as well asanyone the danger of an unsecure border. And she will be a leader who can reform asprawling Department while safeguarding our homeland.

Susan Rice will take on the crucial task of serving as Permanent Representative of the UnitedStates to the United Nations. Susan has been a close and trusted advisor. As in previousAdministrations, the UN Ambassador will serve as a member of my cabinet and an integralmember of my team. Her background as a scholar, on the National Security Council, andAssistant Secretary of State will serve our nation well at the United Nations. Susan knows thatthe global challenges we face demand global institutions that work. She shares my belief thatthe UN is an indispensable and imperfect forum. She will carry the message that ourcommitment to multilateral action must be coupled with a commitment to reform. We needthe United Nations to be more effective as a venue for collective action -- against terror andproliferation, climate change and genocide, poverty and disease.
Finally, I am convinced that General James Jones is uniquely suited to be a strong and skilledNational Security Advisor. Generations of Joneses have served heroically on the battlefield --from the beaches of Tarawa in World War II, to Foxtrot Ridge in Vietnam. Jim's Silver Star is aproud part of that legacy. He will bring to the job the dual experience of serving in uniformand as a diplomat. He has commanded a platoon in battle, served as Supreme AlliedCommander in a time of war, and worked on behalf of peace in the Middle East. Jim is focusedon the threats of today and the future. He understands the connection between energy andnational security, and has worked on the frontlines of global instability – from Kosovo tonorthern Iraq to Afghanistan. He will advise me and work effectively to integrate our effortsacross the government, so that we are effectively using all elements of American power todefeat unconventional threats and promote our values.
I am confident that this team is what we need to make a new beginning for American nationalsecurity. This morning, we met to discuss the situation in Mumbai and some of the challengesthat we face in the months and years ahead. In the coming weeks, I will be in close contactwith these advisors, who will be working with their counterparts in the Bush Administration tomake sure that we are ready to hit the ground running on January 20th. Given the range ofthreats that we face and the vulnerability that can be a part of every presidential transition, Ihope that we can proceed swiftly for those national security officials who demandconfirmation.
We move forward with the humility that comes with knowing that there are brave men andwomen protecting us on our front lines: diplomats and intelligence officers in dangerouscorners of the world, troops serving their second, third, or fourth tours; FBI agents in thefield, cops on the beat, prosecutors in our courts, and cargo inspectors at our ports. Theseselfless Americans whose names are unknown to most of us will form the backbone of oureffort. If we serve as well as they are serving, we will protect our country and promote ourvalues.
And as we move forward with respect for America's tradition of a bipartisan national securitypolicy and a commitment to national unity, we have to recall that when it comes to keepingour nation and our people safe, we are not Republicans or Democrats: We are Americans. 

There's no monopoly of power or wisdom in either party. Together, as one nation, as onepeople, we can shape our times instead of being shaped by them. Together, we will meet thechallenges of the 21st century not with fear, but with hope.