Well, good morning, everyone. 
Rosy, thank you for your kind words. I have never seen Rosy on the basketball court. I'll bet itwould be a treat. Rosy, you've been a dear friend of mine for a long time and a tirelessadvocate for the unbreakable bonds between Israel and the United States. And as youcomplete your term as President, I salute your leadership and your commitment.
I want to thank the board of directors. As always, I’m glad to see my long-time friends in theChicago delegation. I also want to thank the members of Congress who are with us heretoday, and who will be speaking to you over the next few days. You've worked hard tomaintain the partnership between the United States and Israel. And I especially want to thankmy close friend, and leader of the Democratic National Committee, Debbie WassermanSchultz.
I’m glad that my outstanding young Ambassador to Israel, Dan Shapiro, is in the house. Iunderstand that Dan is perfecting his Hebrew on his new assignment, and I appreciate hisconstant outreach to the Israeli people. And I’m also pleased that we’re joined by so manyIsraeli officials, including Ambassador Michael Oren. And tomorrow, I’m very much lookingforward to welcoming Prime Minister Netanyahu and his delegation back to the White House.
Every time I come to AIPAC, I’m especially impressed to see so many young people here. Youdon't yet get the front seats -- I understand. You have to earn that. But students from all overthe country who are making their voices heard and engaging deeply in our democratic debate.
  
You carry with you an extraordinary legacy of more than six decades of friendship betweenthe United States and Israel. And you have the opportunity -- and the responsibility -- tomake your own mark on the world. And for inspiration, you can look to the man who precededme on this stage, who's being honored at this conference -- my friend, President ShimonPeres.
Shimon was born a world away from here, in a shtetl in what was then Poland, a few yearsafter the end of the first world war. But his heart was always in Israel, the historic homelandof the Jewish people. And when he was just a boy he made his journey across land and sea --toward home.
In his life, he has fought for Israel’s independence, and he has fought for peace and security.As a member of the Haganah and a member of the Knesset, as a Minister of Defense andForeign Affairs, as a Prime Minister and as President -- Shimon helped build the nation thatthrives today: the Jewish state of Israel. But beyond these extraordinary achievements, hehas also been a powerful moral voice that reminds us that right makes might -- not the otherway around.
Shimon once described the story of the Jewish people by saying it proved that, "slings, arrowsand gas chambers can annihilate man, but cannot destroy human values, dignity, andfreedom." And he has lived those values. He has taught us to ask more of ourselves, and toempathize more with our fellow human beings. I am grateful for his life's work and his moralexample. And I'm proud to announce that later this spring, I will invite Shimon Peres to theWhite House to present him with America’s highest civilian honor -- the Presidential Medal ofFreedom.
In many ways, this award is a symbol of the broader ties that bind our nations. The UnitedStates and Israel share interests, but we also share those human values that Shimon spokeabout: A commitment to human dignity. A belief that freedom is a right that is given to all ofGod's children. An experience that shows us that democracy is the one and only form ofgovernment that can truly respond to the aspirations of citizens.
America’s Founding Fathers understood this truth, just as Israel’s founding generation did.President Truman put it well, describing his decision to formally recognize Israel only minutesafter it declared independence. He said, 
I had faith in Israel before it was established. I believe it has a glorious future before it -- asnot just another sovereign nation, but as an embodiment of the great ideals of our civilization.
For over six decades, the American people have kept that faith. Yes, we are bound to Israelbecause of the interests that we share -- in security for our communities, prosperity for ourpeople, the new frontiers of science that can light the world.
  
But ultimately it is our common ideals that provide the true foundation for our relationship.That is why America’s commitment to Israel has endured under Democratic and RepublicanPresidents, and congressional leaders of both parties. In the United States, our support forIsrael is bipartisan, and that is how it should stay.
AIPAC’s work continually nurtures this bond. And because of AIPAC’s effectiveness in carryingout its mission, you can expect that over the next several days, you will hear many fine wordsfrom elected officials describing their commitment to the U.S.-Israel relationship. But as youexamine my commitment, you don’t just have to count on my words. You can look at mydeeds. Because over the last three years, as President of the United States, I have kept mycommitments to the state of Israel. At every crucial juncture -- at every fork in the road -- wehave been there for Israel. Every single time.
Four years ago, I stood before you and said that, "Israel’s security is sacrosanct. It is non-
negotiable." That belief has guided my actions as President. The fact is, my administration’scommitment to Israel’s security has been unprecedented. Our military and intelligencecooperation has never been closer. Our joint exercises and training have never been morerobust. Despite a tough budget environment, our security assistance has increased everysingle year. We are investing in new capabilities. We’re providing Israel with more advancedtechnology -- the types of products and systems that only go to our closest friends and allies.And make no mistake: We will do what it takes to preserve Israel’s qualitative military edge --because Israel must always have the ability to defend itself, by itself, against any threat.
This isn’t just about numbers on a balance sheet. As a senator, I spoke to Israeli troops on theLebanese border. I visited with families who’ve known the terror of rocket fire in Sderot. Andthat’s why, as President, I have provided critical funding to deploy the Iron Dome system thathas intercepted rockets that might have hit homes and hospitals and schools in that town andin others. Now our assistance is expanding Israel’s defensive capabilities, so that more Israeliscan live free from the fear of rockets and ballistic missiles. Because no family, no citizen,should live in fear.
And just as we’ve been there with our security assistance, we've been there through ourdiplomacy. When the Goldstone report unfairly singled out Israel for criticism, we challengedit. When Israel was isolated in the aftermath of the flotilla incident, we supported them. Whenthe Durban conference was commemorated, we boycotted it, and we will always reject thenotion that Zionism is racism.
When one-sided resolutions are brought up at the Human Rights Council, we oppose them.When Israeli diplomats feared for their lives in Cairo, we intervened to save them. When thereare efforts to boycott or divest from Israel, we will stand against them. And whenever aneffort is made to de-legitimize the state of Israel, my administration has opposed them. Sothere should not be a shred of doubt by now -- when the chips are down, I have Israel’s back.
  
Which is why, if during this political season -- you hear some questions regarding myadministration’s support for Israel, remember that it’s not backed up by the facts. Andremember that the U.S.-Israel relationship is simply too important to be distorted by partisanpolitics. America’s national security is too important. Israel’s security is too important.
Of course, there are those who question not my security and diplomatic commitments, butrather my administration’s ongoing pursuit of peace between Israelis and Palestinians. So letme say this: I make no apologies for pursuing peace. Israel’s own leaders understand thenecessity of peace. Prime Minister Netanyahu, Defense Minister Barak, President Peres -- eachof them have called for two states, a secure Israel that lives side by side with an independentPalestinian state. I believe that peace is profoundly in Israel’s security interest.
The reality that Israel faces -- from shifting demographics, to emerging technologies, to anextremely difficult international environment -- demands a resolution of this issue. And Ibelieve that peace with the Palestinians is consistent with Israel’s founding values -- becauseof our shared belief in self-determination, and because Israel’s place as a Jewish anddemocratic state must be protected.
Of course, peace is hard to achieve. There’s a reason why it's remained elusive for sixdecades. The upheaval and uncertainty in Israel’s neighborhood makes it that much harder --from the horrific violence raging in Syria, to the transition in Egypt. And the division within thePalestinian leadership makes it harder still -- most notably, with Hamas’s continued rejectionof Israel’s very right to exist.
But as hard as it may be, we should not, and cannot, give in to cynicism or despair. Thechanges taking place in the region make peace more important, not less. And I've made itclear that there will be no lasting peace unless Israel’s security concerns are met. That's whywe continue to press Arab leaders to reach out to Israel, and will continue to support thepeace treaty with Egypt. That’s why -- just as we encourage Israel to be resolute in thepursuit of peace -- we have continued to insist that any Palestinian partner must recognizeIsrael’s right to exist, and reject violence, and adhere to existing agreements. And that is whymy administration has consistently rejected any efforts to short-cut negotiations or impose anagreement on the parties.
As Rosy noted, last year, I stood before you and pledged that, "the United States will stand upagainst efforts to single Israel out at the United Nations." As you know, that pledge has beenkept. Last September, I stood before the United Nations General Assembly and reaffirmedthat any lasting peace must acknowledge the fundamental legitimacy of Israel and its securityconcerns. I said that America’s commitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable, our friendshipwith Israel is enduring, and that Israel must be recognized. No American President has madesuch a clear statement about our support for Israel at the United Nations at such a difficulttime. People usually give those speeches before audiences like this one -- not before theGeneral Assembly.
  
And I must say, there was not a lot of applause. But it was the right thing to do. And as aresult, today there is no doubt -- anywhere in the world -- that the United States will insistupon Israel’s security and legitimacy. That will be true as we continue our efforts to pursue --in the pursuit of peace. And that will be true when it comes to the issue that is such a focusfor all of us today: Iran’s nuclear program -- a threat that has the potential to bring togetherthe worst rhetoric about Israel’s destruction with the world’s most dangerous weapons.
Let’s begin with a basic truth that you all understand: No Israeli government can tolerate anuclear weapon in the hands of a regime that denies the Holocaust, threatens to wipe Israeloff the map, and sponsors terrorist groups committed to Israel’s destruction. And so Iunderstand the profound historical obligation that weighs on the shoulders of Bibi Netanyahuand Ehud Barak, and all of Israel’s leaders.
A nuclear-armed Iran is completely counter to Israel’s security interests. But it is also counterto the national security interests of the United States.
Indeed, the entire world has an interest in preventing Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon. Anuclear-armed Iran would thoroughly undermine the non-proliferation regime that we've doneso much to build. There are risks that an Iranian nuclear weapon could fall into the hands of aterrorist organization. It is almost certain that others in the region would feel compelled to gettheir own nuclear weapon, triggering an arms race in one of the world's most volatile regions.It would embolden a regime that has brutalized its own people, and it would embolden Iran’sproxies, who have carried out terrorist attacks from the Levant to southwest Asia.
And that is why, four years ago, I made a commitment to the American people, and said thatwe would use all elements of American power to pressure Iran and prevent it from acquiring anuclear weapon. And that is what we have done.
When I took office, the efforts to apply pressure on Iran were in tatters. Iran had gone fromzero centrifuges spinning to thousands, without facing broad pushback from the world. In theregion, Iran was ascendant -- increasingly popular, and extending its reach. In other words,the Iranian leadership was united and on the move, and the international community wasdivided about how to go forward.
And so from my very first months in office, we put forward a very clear choice to the Iranianregime: a path that would allow them to rejoin the community of nations if they meet theirinternational obligations, or a path that leads to an escalating series of consequences if theydon't. In fact, our policy of engagement -- quickly rebuffed by the Iranian regime -- allowedus to rally the international community as never before, to expose Iran’s intransigence, and toapply pressure that goes far beyond anything that the United States could do on our own.
  
Because of our efforts, Iran is under greater pressure than ever before. Some of you willrecall, people predicted that Russia and China wouldn’t join us to move toward pressure. Theydid. And in 2010 the U.N. Security Council overwhelmingly supported a comprehensivesanctions effort. Few thought that sanctions could have an immediate bite on the Iranianregime. They have, slowing the Iranian nuclear program and virtually grinding the Iranianeconomy to a halt in 2011. Many questioned whether we could hold our coalition together aswe moved against Iran’s Central Bank and oil exports. But our friends in Europe and Asia andelsewhere are joining us. And in 2012, the Iranian government faces the prospect of evenmore crippling sanctions.
That is where we are today -- because of our work. Iran is isolated, its leadership divided andunder pressure. And by the way, the Arab Spring has only increased these trends, as thehypocrisy of the Iranian regime is exposed, and its ally -- the Assad regime -- is crumbling.
Of course, so long as Iran fails to meet its obligations, this problem remains unresolved. Theeffective implementation of our policy is not enough -- we must accomplish our objective. Andin that effort, I firmly believe that an opportunity still remains for diplomacy -- backed bypressure -- to succeed.
The United States and Israel both assess that Iran does not yet have a nuclear weapon, andwe are exceedingly vigilant in monitoring their program. Now, the international communityhas a responsibility to use the time and space that exists. Sanctions are continuing toincrease, and this July -- thanks to our diplomatic coordination -- a European ban on Iranianoil imports will take hold. Faced with these increasingly dire consequences, Iran’s leaders stillhave the opportunity to make the right decision. They can choose a path that brings themback into the community of nations, or they can continue down a dead end.
And given their history, there are, of course, no guarantees that the Iranian regime will makethe right choice. But both Israel and the United States have an interest in seeing thischallenge resolved diplomatically. After all, the only way to truly solve this problem is for theIranian government to make a decision to forsake nuclear weapons. That’s what history tellsus.
Moreover, as President and Commander-in-Chief, I have a deeply held preference for peaceover war. I have sent men and women into harm’s way. I've seen the consequences of thosedecisions in the eyes of those I meet who've come back gravely wounded, and the absence ofthose who don’t make it home. Long after I leave this office, I will remember those momentsas the most searing of my presidency. And for this reason, as part of my solemn obligation tothe American people, I will only use force when the time and circumstances demand it. And Iknow that Israeli leaders also know all too well the costs and consequences of war, even asthey recognize their obligation to defend their country.
  
We all prefer to resolve this issue diplomatically. Having said that, Iran’s leaders should haveno doubt about the resolve of the United States -- just as they should not doubt Israel’ssovereign right to make its own decisions about what is required to meet its security needs.
I have said that when it comes to preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, I will takeno options off the table, and I mean what I say. That includes all elements of Americanpower: A political effort aimed at isolating Iran; a diplomatic effort to sustain our coalition andensure that the Iranian program is monitored; an economic effort that imposes cripplingsanctions; and, yes, a military effort to be prepared for any contingency.
Iran’s leaders should understand that I do not have a policy of containment; I have a policy toprevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. And as I have made clear time and againduring the course of my presidency, I will not hesitate to use force when it is necessary todefend the United States and its interests.
Moving forward, I would ask that we all remember the weightiness of these issues; the stakesinvolved for Israel, for America, and for the world. Already, there is too much loose talk ofwar. Over the last few weeks, such talk has only benefited the Iranian government, by drivingup the price of oil, which they depend on to fund their nuclear program. For the sake ofIsrael’s security, America’s security, and the peace and security of the world, now is not thetime for bluster. Now is the time to let our increased pressure sink in, and to sustain thebroad international coalition we have built. Now is the time to heed the timeless advice fromTeddy Roosevelt: Speak softly; carry a big stick. And as we do, rest assured that the Iraniangovernment will know our resolve, and that our coordination with Israel will continue. 
These are challenging times. But we've been through challenging times before, and the UnitedStates and Israel have come through them together. Because of our cooperation, citizens inboth our countries have benefited from the bonds that bring us together. I'm proud to be oneof those people. In the past, I've shared in this forum just why those bonds are so personalfor me: the stories of a great uncle who helped liberate Buchenwald, to my memories ofreturning there with Elie Wiesel; from sharing books with President Peres to sharing sederswith my young staff in a tradition that started on the campaign trail and continues in theWhite House; from the countless friends I know in this room to the concept of "tikkun olam"that has enriched and guided my life.
As Harry Truman understood, Israel’s story is one of hope. We may not agree on every singleissue -- no two nations do, and our democracies contain a vibrant diversity of views. But weagree on the big things -- the things that matter. And together, we are working to build abetter world -- one where our people can live free from fear; one where peace is foundedupon justice; one where our children can know a future that is more hopeful than the present.
  
There is no shortage of speeches on the friendship between the United States and Israel. ButI'm also mindful of the proverb, "A man is judged by his deeds, not his words." So if you wantto know where my heart lies, look no further than what I have done -- to stand up for Israel;to secure both of our countries; and to see that the rough waters of our time lead to apeaceful and prosperous shore.
Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. God bless the people of Israel. God blessthe United States of America.
