Thank you so much.  Thank you so much, Neha, for what a wonderful introduction.Everybody, please have a seat.  Nothing fills me with more hope than when I hear incredibleyoung people like Neha and all the outstanding work that she’s doing on behalf of India’syouth and for representing this nation’s energy and its optimism and its idealism.  She makesme very, very proud.  And I’m sure -- I think they may be her -- is that somebody related toyou?  Okay.  Because we just had a chance to meet, and she’s beaming with pride right nowsitting next to you.  Give Neha a big round of applause once again.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, to all the students and young people who arehere today, to the people of India watching and listening across this vast nation -- I bring thefriendship and the greetings of the American people.  On behalf of myself and Michelle, thankyou so much for welcoming us back to India.  Bahoot dhanyavad.
It has been a great honor to be the first American President to join you for Republic Day. With the tricolor waving above us, we celebrated the strength of your constitution.  We paidtribute to India’s fallen heroes.  In yesterday’s parade, we saw the pride and the diversity ofthis nation -- including the Dare Devils on their Royal Enfields, which was very impressive. Secret Service does not let me ride motorcycles.  Especially not on my head.
  
I realize that the sight of an American President as your chief guest on Republic Day wouldhave once seemed unimaginable.  But my visit reflects the possibilities of a new moment.  AsI’ve said many times, I believe that the relationship between India and the United States canbe one of the defining partnerships of this century.  When I spoke to your Parliament on mylast visit, I laid out my vision for how our two nations can build that partnership.  And today, Iwant to speak directly to you -- the people of India -- about what I believe we can achievetogether, and how we can do it.
My commitment to a new chapter between our countries flows from the deep friendshipbetween our people.  And Michelle and I have felt it ourselves.  I recognized India with thefirst state visit of my presidency -- where we also danced to some pretty good Bhangra. Forthe first time, we brought Diwali to the White House. On our last celebration here, wecelebrated the Festival of Lights in Mumbai.  We danced with some children.  Unfortunately,we were not able to schedule any dancing this visit.  Senorita, bade-bade deshon mein.  Youknow what I mean.  Everybody said, by the way, how much better a dance Michelle was thanme -- which hurt my feelings a little bit.
On a more personal level, India represents an intersection of two men who have alwaysinspired me.  When Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was protesting racial segregation inthe United States, he said that his guiding light was Mahatma Gandhi.  When Dr. King came toIndia, he said that being here -- in “Gandhi’s land” -- reaffirmed his conviction that in thestruggle for justice and human dignity, the most potent weapon of all is non-violentresistance.   And those two great souls are why we can gather here together today, Indiansand Americans, equal and free. And there is another link that binds us.  More than 100 years ago, America welcomed a son ofIndia -- Swami Vivekananda. And Swami Vivekananda, he helped bring Hinduism and yoga toour country.  And he came to my hometown of Chicago.  And there, at a great gathering ofreligious leaders, he spoke of his faith and the divinity in every soul, and the purity of love. And he began his speech with a simple greeting:  “Sisters and brothers of America.” So today, let me say:  Sisters and brothers of India -- my confidence in what our nations canachieve together is rooted in the values we share.  For we may have our different historiesand speak different languages, but when we look at each other, we see a reflection ofourselves.  Having thrown off colonialism, we created constitutions that began with the same three words-- “We the people.”  As societies that celebrate knowledge and innovation, we transformedourselves into high-tech hubs of the global economy.  Together, we unlock new discoveries --from the particles of creation to outer space -- two nations to have gone to both the Moon andto Mars. And here in India, this dynamism has resulted in a stunning achievement.  You’velifted countless millions from poverty and built one of the world’s largest middle classes. 
  
And nobody embodies this progress and this sense of possibility more than our young people. Empowered by technology, you are connecting and collaborating like never before -- onFacebook and WhatsApp and Twitter.  And chances are, you’re talking to someone in America-- your friends, your cousins.  The United States has the largest Indian diaspora in the world,including some three million proud Indian-Americans. And they make America stronger, andthey tie us together -- bonds of family and friendship that allow us to share in each other’ssuccess. For all these reasons, India and the United States are not just natural partners.  I believeAmerica can be India’s best partner.  I believe that. Of course, only Indians can decide India’srole in the world.  But I’m here because I’m absolutely convinced that both our peoples willhave more jobs and opportunity, and our nations will be more secure, and the world will be asafer and a more just place when our two democracies -- the world’s largest democracy andthe world’s oldest democracy -- stand together.  I believe that.    So here in New Delhi, Prime Minister Modi and I have begun this work anew.  And here’s whatI think we can do together.  America wants to be your partner as you lift up the lives of theIndian people and provide greater opportunity.  So working together, we’re giving farmersnew techniques and data -- from our satellites to their cell phones -- to increase yields andboost incomes.  We’re joining you in your effort to empower every Indian with a bankaccount.  And with the breakthroughs we achieved on this visit, we can finally move toward fullyimplementing our civil nuclear agreement, which will mean more reliable electricity for Indiansand cleaner, non-carbon energy that helps fight climate change.  And I don’t have to describefor you what more electricity means.  Students being able to study at night; businesses beingable to stay open longer and hire more workers; farmers being able to use mechanized toolsthat increase their productivity; whole communities seeing more prosperity.  In recent years,India has lifted more people out of poverty than any other country.  And now we have ahistoric opportunity with India leading the way to end the injustice of extreme poverty allaround the world.   America wants to be your partner as you protect the health of your people and the beauty ofthis land, from the backwaters of Kerala to the banks of Ganges.  As we deliver more energy,more electricity, let’s do it with clean, renewable energy, like solar and wind.  And let’s putcleaner vehicles on the road and more filtration systems on farms and villages.  Becauseevery child should be able to drink clean water, and every child should be able to breatheclean air. We need our young people healthy for their futures.  And we can do it.  We have thetechnology to do it. America wants to be your partner in igniting the next wave of Indian growth.  As Indiapursues more trade and investment, we want to be first in line.  We’re ready to join you inbuilding new infrastructure -- the roads and the airports, the ports, the bullet trains to propelIndia into the future.  We’re ready to help design “smart cities” that serve citizens better, andwe want to develop more advanced technologies with India, as we do with our closest allies.  
  
 We believe we can be even closer partners in ensuring our mutual security.  And both ournations have known the anguish of terrorism, and we stand united in the defense of ourpeople.  And now we’re deepening our defense cooperation against new challenges.  TheUnited States welcomes a greater role for India in the Asia Pacific, where the freedom ofnavigation must be upheld and disputes must be resolved peacefully.  And even as weacknowledge the world as it is, we must never stop working for the world as it should be -- aworld without nuclear weapons.  That should be a goal for all of us.   I believe that if we’re going to be true global partners, then our two nations must do morearound the world together.  So to ensure international security and peace, multilateralinstitutions created in the 20th century have to be updated for the 21st.  And that’s why Isupport a reformed United Nations Security Council that includes India as a permanentmember.   Of course, as I’ve said before, with power comes responsibility.  In this region, India can playa positive role in helping countries forge a better future, from Burma to Sri Lanka, wheretoday there’s new hope for democracy.  With your experience in elections, you can help othercountries with theirs.  With your expertise in science and medicine, India can do more aroundthe world to fight disease and develop new vaccines, and help us end the moral outrage ofeven a single child dying from a preventable disease.  Together, we can stand up againsthuman trafficking and work to end the scourge of modern day slavery.   And being global partners means confronting the urgent global challenge of climate change. With rising seas, melting Himalayan glaciers, more unpredictable monsoons, cyclones gettingstronger -- few countries will be more affected by a warmer planet than India.  And the UnitedStates recognizes our part in creating this problem, so we’re leading the global effort tocombat it.  And today, I can say that America’s carbon pollution is near its lowest level inalmost two decades.  I know the argument made by some that it’s unfair for countries like the United States to askdeveloping nations and emerging economies like India to reduce your dependence on thesame fossil fuels that helped power our growth for more than a century.  But here’s the truth: Even if countries like the United States curb our emissions, if countries that are growingrapidly like India -- with soaring energy needs -- don't also embrace cleaner fuels, then wedon’t stand a chance against climate change. So we welcome India’s ambitious targets for generating more clean energy.  We’ll continue tohelp India deal with the impacts of climate change -- because you shouldn’t have to bear thatburden alone.  As we keep working for a strong global agreement on climate change, it'syoung people like you who have to speak up, so we can protect this planet for yourgeneration.  I'll be gone when the worst effects happen.  It's your generation and yourchildren that are going to be impacted.  That's why it's urgent that we begin this work rightnow. 
  
Development that lifts up the lives and health of our people.  Trade and economicpartnerships that reduce poverty and create opportunity.  Leadership in the world thatdefends our security, and advances human dignity, and protects our planet -- that’s what Ibelieve India and America can do together.  So with the rest of my time, I want to discusshow we can do it.  Because in big and diverse societies like ours, progress ultimately dependson something more basic, and that is how we see each other.  And we know from experiencewhat makes nations strong. And Neha I think did a great job of describing the essence ofwhat’s important here.  We are strongest when we see the inherent dignity in every human being.  Look at ourcountries -- the incredible diversity even here in this hall.  India is defined by countlesslanguages and dialects, and every color and caste and creed, gender and orientations.  Andlikewise, in America, we’re black and white, and Latino and Asian, and Indian-American, andNative American.  Your constitution begins with the pledge to uphold “the dignity of theindividual.”  And our Declaration of Independence proclaims that “all men are created equal.” In both our countries, generations have worked to live up to these ideals.  When he came toIndia, Martin Luther King, Jr. was introduced to some schoolchildren as a “fellowuntouchable.”  My grandfather was a cook for the British army in Kenya.  The distant branchesof Michelle’s family tree include both slaves and slave owners.  When we were born, peoplewho looked like us still couldn’t vote in some parts of the country.  Even as America hasblessed us with extraordinary opportunities, there were moments in my life where I’ve beentreated differently because of the color of my skin.  Many countries, including the United States, grapple with questions of identity and inequality,and how we treat each other, people who are different than us, how we deal with diversity ofbeliefs and of faiths.  Right now, in crowded neighborhoods not far from here, a man is drivingan auto-rickshaw, or washing somebody else’s clothes, or doing the hard work no one else willdo.  And a woman is cleaning somebody else’s house.  And a young man is on a bicycledelivering lunch. A little girl is hauling a heavy bucket of water.  And I believe their dreams,their hopes, are just as important, just as beautiful, just as worthy as ours.  And so even aswe live in a world of terrible inequality, we’re also proud to live in countries where even thegrandson of a cook can become President, or even a Dalit can help write a constitution, andeven a tea seller can become Prime Minister.    The point is, is that the aim of our work must be not to just have a few do well, but to haveeverybody have a chance, everybody who is willing to work for it have the ability to dream bigand then reach those dreams.  Our nations are strongest when we uphold the equality of all our people -- and that includesour women. Now, you may have noticed, I’m married to a very strong and talented woman.Michelle is not afraid to speak her mind, or tell me when I’m wrong -- which happensfrequently.
  
And we have two beautiful daughters, so I’m surrounded by smart, strong women.  And inraising our girls, we’ve tried to instill in them basic values -- a sense of compassion for others,and respect for themselves, and the confidence that they can go as far as their imaginationsand abilities will carry them.  And as part of Michelle’s work as First Lady, she’s met withwomen and girls around the world, including here in India, to let them know that Americabelieves in them, too. In the United States, we’re still working to make sure that women and girls have all theopportunities they deserve, and that they’re treated equally.  And we have some great rolemodels, including here today the former speaker of our House of Representatives -- NancyPelosi -- the first woman speaker of the House, and my great partner.   And here in India, it’s the wives and the mothers who so often hold families and communitiestogether.  Indian women have shown that they can succeed in every field -- includinggovernment, where many of your leaders are women.  And the young women who are heretoday are part of a new generation that is making your voice heard, and standing up anddetermined to play your part in India’s progress. And here’s what we know.  We know from experience that nations are more successful whentheir women are successful. When girls go to school -- this is one of the most direct measuresof whether a nation is going to develop effectively is how it treats its women.  When a girlgoes to school, it doesn’t just open up her young mind, it benefits all of us -- because maybesomeday she’ll start her own business, or invent a new technology, or cure a disease.  Andwhen women are able to work, families are healthier, and communities are wealthier, andentire countries are more prosperous.  And when young women are educated, then theirchildren are going to be well educated and have more opportunity.  So if nations really want to succeed in today’s global economy, they can’t simply ignore thetalents of half their people.  And as husbands and fathers and brothers, we have to step up --because every girl’s life matters.  Every daughter deserves the same chance as our sons. Every woman should be able to go about her day -- to walk the streets or ride the bus -- andbe safe, and be treated with respect and dignity. She deserves that.      And one of the favorite things about this trip for me has been to see all these incredible Indianwomen in the armed forces, including the person who commanded the Guard that greeted mewhen I arrived. It's remarkable, and it's a sign of great strength and great progress. Our nations are strongest when we see that we are all God’s children -- all equal in His eyesand worthy of His love.  Across our two great countries we have Hindus and Muslims,Christians and Sikhs, and Jews and Buddhists and Jains and so many faiths.  And weremember the wisdom of Gandhiji, who said, “for me, the different religions are beautifulflowers from the same garden, or they are branches of the same majestic tree.”   Branches ofthe same majestic tree. 
  
Our freedom of religion is written into our founding documents.  It’s part of America’s veryfirst amendment.  Your Article 25 says that all people are “equally entitled to freedom ofconscience and the right freely to profess, practice and propagate religion.”  In both ourcountries -- in all countries -- upholding this fundamental freedom is the responsibility ofgovernment, but it's also the responsibility of every person. In our lives, Michelle and I have been strengthened by our Christian faith.  But there havebeen times where my faith has been questioned -- by people who don’t know me -- or they’vesaid that I adhere to a different religion, as if that were somehow a bad thing.  Around theworld, we’ve seen intolerance and violence and terror perpetrated by those who profess to bestanding up for their faith, but, in fact, are betraying it.  No society is immune from thedarkest impulses of man.  And too often religion has been used to tap into those darkerimpulses as opposed to the light of God.  Three years ago in our state of Wisconsin, back inthe United States, a man went to a Sikh temple and, in a terrible act of violence, killed sixinnocent people -- Americans and Indians.  And in that moment of shared grief, our twocountries reaffirmed a basic truth, as we must again today -- that every person has the rightto practice their faith how they choose, or to practice no faith at all, and to do so free ofpersecution and fear and discrimination.    The peace we seek in the world begins in human hearts.  And it finds its glorious expressionwhen we look beyond any differences in religion or tribe, and rejoice in the beauty of everysoul.  And nowhere is that more important than India.  Nowhere is it going to be morenecessary for that foundational value to be upheld.  India will succeed so long as it is notsplintered along the lines of religious faith -- so long as it's not splintered along any lines --and is unified as one nation.
And it’s when all Indians, whatever your faith, go to the movies and applaud actors like ShahRukh Khan.  And when you celebrate athletes like Milkha Singh or Mary Kom.  And everyIndian can take pride in the courage of a humanitarian who liberates boys and girls fromforced labor and exploitation -- who is here today -- Kailash Satyarthi. Our most recent winnerof the Nobel Prize for Peace.   So that's what unifies us:  Do we act with compassion and empathy.  Are we measured by ourefforts -- by what Dr. King called “the content of our character” rather than the color of ourskin or the manner in which we worship our God.  In both our countries, in India and inAmerica, our diversity is our strength.  And we have to guard against any efforts to divideourselves along sectarian lines or any other lines.  And if we do that well, if America showsitself as an example of its diversity and yet the capacity to live together and work together incommon effort, in common purpose; if India, as massive as it is, with so much diversity, somany differences is able to continually affirm its democracy, that is an example for everyother country on Earth.  That's what makes us world leaders -- not just the size of oureconomy or the number of weapons we have, but our ability to show the way in how we worktogether, and how much respect we show each other.  
  
And, finally, our nations are strongest when we empower our young people –- becauseultimately, you're the one who has to break down these old stereotypes and these oldbarriers, these old ways of thinking.  Prejudices and stereotypes and assumptions -- those arewhat happens to old minds like mine.  I'm getting gray hair now.  I was more youthful when Ifirst started this office.  And that’s why young people are so important in these efforts. Here in India, most people are under 35 years old.  And India is on track to become theworld’s most populous country.  So young Indians like you aren’t just going to define thefuture of this nation, you’re going to shape the world.  Like young people everywhere, youwant to get an education, and find a good job, and make your mark.  And it’s not easy, but inour two countries, it’s possible. Remember, Michelle and I don't come from wealthy backgrounds or famous families.  Ourfamilies didn’t have a lot of money.  We did have parents and teachers and communities thatcared about us.  And with the help of scholarships and student loans, we were able to attendsome of best schools of the world.  Without that education, we wouldn’t be here today.  Sowhether it’s in America, or here in India, or around the world, we believe young people likeyou ought to have every chance to pursue your dreams, as well.  So as India builds new community colleges, we’ll link you with our own, so more young peoplegraduate with the skills and training to succeed.  We’ll increase collaborations between ourcolleges and universities, and help create the next India institute of technology.  We’llencourage young entrepreneurs who want to start a business.  And we’ll increase exchanges,because I want more American students coming to India, and more Indian students coming toAmerica. And that way, we can learn from each other and we can go further.  Because oneother thing we have in common Indians and Americans are some of the hardest workingpeople on Earth.    And I’ve seen that -- Michelle and I have seen that in a family here in India.  I just want to tellyou a quick story.  On our last visit here, we visited Humayun’s Tomb.  And while we werethere, we met some of the laborers who are the backbone of this nation’s progress.  We mettheir children and their families as well -- and some wonderful young children with brightsmiles, sparks in their eyes.  And one of the children we met was a boy named Vishal. And today, Vishal is 16 years old.  And he and his family live in South Delhi, in the village ofMor Band. And his mother works hard in their modest home, and his sister is now inuniversity; she wants to become a teacher.  His brother is a construction worker earning hisdaily wage.  And his father works as a stone layer, farther away, but sends home what littlehe makes so Vishal can go to school.  And Vishal loves math, and mostly, he studies.  Andwhen he’s not studying, he likes watching kabaddi.  And he dreams of someday joining theIndian armed forces. And we're grateful that Vishal and his family joined us today.  We're veryproud of him, because he’s an example of the talent that’s here.  And Vishal’s dreams are asimportant as Malia and Sasha’s dreams, our daughters.  And we want him to have the sameopportunities.
  
Sisters and brothers of India, we are not perfect countries. And we’ve known tragedy andwe've known triumph.  We’re home to glittering skyscrapers, but also terrible poverty; andnew wealth, but also rising inequality.  We have many challenges in front of us.  But thereason I stand here today, and am so optimistic about our future together, is that, despite ourimperfections, our two nations possess the keys to progress in the century ahead.  We vote infree elections.  We work and we build and we innovate.  We lift up the least among us.  Wereach for heights previous generations could not even imagine.  We respect human rights andhuman dignity, and it is recorded in our constitutions.  And we keep striving to live up tothose ideals put to paper all those years ago. And we do these things because they make our lives better and safer and more prosperous. But we also do them because our moral imaginations extend beyond the limits of our ownlives.  And we believe that the circumstances of our birth need not dictate the arc of our lives. We believe in the father working far from home sending money back so his family might havea better life.  We believe in the mother who goes without so that her children might havesomething more.  We believe in the laborer earning his daily wage, and the student pursuingher degree.  And we believe in a young boy who knows that if he just keeps studying, if he’sjust given the chance, his hopes might be realized, too. We are all “beautiful flowers from the same garden…branches of the same majestic tree.”  AndI'm the first American President to come to your country twice, but I predict I will not be thelast. Because, as Americans, we believe in the promise of India.  We believe in the people ofIndia.  We are proud to be your friend.  We are proud to be your partner as you build thecountry of your dreams.  Jai Hind! Thank you.
