Professor Strauss:  Well, Mr. President, it's a tremendous honor for the University and thelaw school.  Welcome back.
President Obama:  It is good to be back.    It is good to be back.  As some of you mayknow, I actually spent 10 years teaching classes and seminars here, and it was really fun.  And I missed it.  And I thought, well, why don't I come back and say hi to everybody.
So there are a couple of people I want to acknowledge because they helped to facilitate this. First of all, I want to thank Dean Miles for closing down the school, I guess, for a day.   Thankyou.  Special acknowledgements for Geoff Stone and Doug Baird, who were great friendswhen I was teaching here and were partly responsible for having me actually take on someresponsibility straight out of law school to mold the minds of students who were just barelyyounger than me.  I know that because some of them I saw and they all have gray hair now -
- which is a little troubling.
  
We've got a terrific congressional delegation who’s here, and I just want to acknowledgethem.  First of all, your outstanding senior Senator for the great state of Illinois, Dick Durbin ishere.  And we've got Congressman Bobby Rush.  Congressman Danny Davis.  CongressmanBill Foster.    And Congressman Mike Quigley.  We also have Lisa Madigan, the AttorneyGeneral of Illinois.    And my former seatmate in Springfield when we were both in the StateSenate together, and is doing a terrific job. 
And I want to thank David, who I was joking before we came out, is one of the country’sforemost constitutional experts -- and a nice guy.    And you guys are lucky to have him. Infact, when I was teaching here I think I stole his Con Law class for a while, and he graciouslygave it up because despite the privilege of grading 60 or 70 bluebooks -- he apparentlythought it was important for me to have that privilege as well. 
The last thing I'll say by way of introduction -- I had a chance to talk to some young peopleover in the overflow room, mostly students, and I just said to them that having now been inpolitics for quite some time, seeing what lawyers are capable of doing every single day,working on a whole range of issues that are of huge importance to our democracy and to oursociety, I hope that all the students here are excited about the incredible changes and goodthat you are going to be able to do when you get out of here. 
I know that sometimes the news feeds cynicism and democracy at this moment seemsparticularly frustrating.  But each and every day, I see lawyers not that much older than youwho are helping young people get an education, are making sure that consumers areprotected, are helping to keep America safe, are ensuring that our health care system worksfor everybody, are helping to preserve the planet and fight against climate change. It isremarkable what you can do with your talents.  And it doesn’t always get a lot of publicity, butyou can make a really meaningful difference.
So one of the reasons I wanted to come back is to recruit you.  To stay engaged, get involved,make a difference.  It doesn’t mean you have to run for office.  It doesn't mean you have torun for office.  It doesn't mean you even have to work for government.  There are a lot ofways of serving.  But I do hope that one of the things that you will take away from ourdiscussion today and your extraordinary education here at the University of Chicago is theincredible high that you can get from serving this country.
So with that, what do you want to talk about, David?  
  
Professor Strauss:  Well, let me start back when you were here as a teacher.  I know youtaught constitutional law, so you were thinking about the Supreme Court and thinking aboutthe justices and what would make someone -- or what make someone a great justice or asuccessful justice.  But you're in a different spot now.    Has your thinking changed?
President Obama:  Surprisingly, not as much as you would have expected.  Obviously, we'rehaving a substantial argument in Washington right now about not just a particular judge, butalso about the process of appointing judges to the federal courts and appointing nominees tothe Supreme Court.
And to get this out of the way, Merrick Garland is an extraordinary jurist who is indisputablyqualified to serve on the highest court in the land.  And nobody really argues otherwise.  I justwant to be clear here.  If the question is qualifications and excellence, it is uniformly viewedby not just Democrats but also Republicans, those who have served -- lawyers, judges, legalscholars, members of the current Supreme Court -- that he is as good of a judge as we havein this country right now.  That he’s fair, he’s smart, he’s objective.  He’s a consensus builder. He shows judicial restraint.  He’s appreciative of the unique role of the Court, but alsorespectful of the role of the other branches of government.
So no one has plausibly made an argument that this is not the kind of person we’d want onthe Supreme Court.  The question then becomes, why is it so hard for the guy just to get ahearing and a vote?
And this speaks to what’s happened, generally, when it comes to the process of appointingfederal judges.  It used to be that people read the Constitution and Article II powers fairlystraightforwardly.  It says the President shall make these nominations with the advice andconsent of the Senate.  And unless there was some sort of real problem with that judge’scharacter or qualifications, it was fairly routine at every level -- both at the district court level,the appellate court level, and the Supreme Court -- that the person would be confirmed inshort order.  There would be a hearing.  People would ask the potential judge a question ortwo or five or 10.  There would be questionnaires.  And once they had satisfactorily performedthat process, then the Senate would vote.
And it was presumed -- it was understood that just as the President had a constitutional dutyto make the appointment that the Senate had a constitutional duty to at least make adetermination as to whether this person should be on the bench.
  
What has been unique in this process has been the growing attitude inside of the Senate thatevery nomination, no matter how well-qualified a judge, is a subject of contention.  In somecases, it’s simply because one party or the other wants to gum up the works and so they willdrag out confirmation longer and longer.  Even if, ultimately, the judge gets confirmed byvoice vote, by unanimous consent in the Senate, they’ll drag it out for two or three months,because if you're bogged down with judges, then it means other business can't be done.  Sosometimes it’s just strategic.
In other cases, the view has been that despite all the talk about people wanting objectivejudges who are just calling balls and strikes and don't bring any views to bear, that there arelitmus tests that are applied that prevent a judge from getting a fair vote, even though they'requalified, because they don't meet the particular views of the party that's objecting.
And this problem got bad enough in previous administrations, but came to a head under myadministration, in which we had a situation where we were starting to see six months pass ornine months pass before a judge could get a hearing.  This was when Democrats were incharge of the Senate, but because of the particular rules of the filibuster that previously hadbeen used for just a few things but now were routinely deployed on everything, we justcouldn’t get judges through.  And you started seeing a crisis in vacancies across districts andcircuits everywhere.
Finally, the Democrats said, we're ending the ability for Senate members to filibuster when itcomes to district court and appellate court justices, but we're going to preserve it for theSupreme Court.
We now have a situation, after Judge Scalia’s passing, in which it’s not just that theRepublican majority in the Senate intend to vote against a highly qualified judge, we nowhave a situation where they're saying, we simply will not consider the nomination itself.  We'rejust going to shut down the process.  And as a consequence, we have a 4-4 tie in theSupreme Court and potentially at least two Supreme Court terms in which this vacancy willremain.
That is unprecedented.  Not only are they not willing to hold a vote at this point, they haverefused to hold hearings on Judge Garland.  And in some cases, Mitch McConnell and othershave said, we will not even show the courtesy of meeting with the judge to find out what hethinks.
  
And I think what’s important for all of you to understand -- because you're going to be notjust lawyers appearing in court, potentially, but custodians of our legal system and ourdemocracy -- is if you start getting into a situation in which the process of appointing judgesis so broken, so partisan that an eminently qualified jurist cannot even get a hearing, then weare going to see the kinds of sharp, partisan polarization that has come to characterize ourelectoral politics seeping entirely into the judicial system.  And the courts will be just anextension of our legislatures and our elections and our politics.
And that erodes the institutional integrity of the judicial branch.  At that point, people loseconfidence in the ability of the courts to fairly adjudicate cases and controversies.  And ourdemocracy can't afford that.  Our system is designed to make sure that this branch works. And it requires a broad consensus, even if we don't agree on any particular ruling, that thecourt’s rulings itself are legitimate and consistent with our democratic design.  And that's whythis is so important.  It’s not just a matter of who is occupying that ninth seat in the SupremeCourt. It has to do with how we, as a democracy, operate, and the particular authority that acourt has to bring in order for our democracy to work.
That was a really long answer.  Others will not be as long.  
Professor Strauss:  Well, let me ask you about that, Mr. President.  How did we get to thispoint?  You hear sometimes that the problem is the Supreme Court has injected itself intopolitical issues, and so, of course, it gets enmeshed in politics.  But the Supreme Court hasbeen controversial almost from the beginning -- from the Jeffersonians’ attack on the MarshallCourt, all the way through the “Impeach Earl Warren” billboards in parts of the country in the‘50s and ‘60s.  And we haven’t had this before.  So is there -- do you have an explanation forwhat it is that brought us to this position?
President Obama:  I think there are a variety of explanations. First of all, it’s important tounderscore what you just said.  And all of you law students, even if you're not critical, legaltheorists, or what have you, I think just from reading cases, you will acknowledge that there’spolitics in legal rulings.  When we make decisions about right, wrong, what are the rulesgoverning our society, et cetera, that that's an extension of our broader political anddemocratic conversation.  Nobody is denying that.
And you're right.  There have been controversies in the past about how we should decide thebalance between liberty and security, about how do we treat minority groups to assure thatthey are protected from majority rule.
  
How do we make sure that the political process itself has integrity and that our votes count? Those are all issue where passions are real and people have opinions.  And there’s nothingwrong with that.
But I think what changed was when the Congress itself, and the Senate in particular, began tochange.  I think in some ways the judicial process is a casualty of some broader trends in ourdemocracy.  First of all, our politics have become much more polarized.  There’s beensomething called the “great sorting” because of gerrymandering, because of how our mediaworks where folks either watch Fox News or they read The New York Times, but rarely doboth.  Positions get hardened and reinforced.  Partisans carry more weight within each party. The notion of a liberal Republican or a conservative Democrat -- those things broke down. And so politics itself got more polarized.
That, then, fed into a culture in Congress in which basic comity and habits of courtesy andprocess and institutional respect for people that you can agree with, those things began tobreak down.  The filibuster, as I said, started becoming just standard practice.  There’snothing in the Constitution that says every item that comes before the Senate is supposed toget a super majority.  It used to be that the filibuster -- it doesn’t have a very distinguishedhistory -- was used principally for blocking civil rights and anti-lynching and voting rightslegislation.  That was bad enough.  It then suddenly became the norm for everything asminority parties started to decide that they wanted to block what the majority of senatorswere in favor of.  And so all of this I think contributed to a breakdown of the process.
Now, in fairness, Democrats are not blameless on this.  If you talk to Republicans, they’ll alsooften point to the Bork nomination as where this all started.  And there have been timeswhere Democrats used the filibuster to block what Republican Presidents or conservative legaltheorists viewed as eminently qualified jurists.  I will say that there has not been acircumstance in which a Republican President’s appointee did not get a hearing, did not get avote, and as a general proposition, they have been confirmed even where there have beenstrong objections. 
So what you have here is, I think, a circumstance in which those in the Senate have decidedthat placating our base is more important than upholding their constitutional and institutionalroles in our democracy in a way that is dangerous.  And there are other examples of it, butthis judicial nomination process I think has become an extreme example.
  
Professor Strauss:  Let me take you back a step to how -- to your thinking about whenyou're making an appointment.  And I'm going to try to put it in an historical context a littlebit.  You have Presidents who really set out to reshape the Court.  And Franklin Roosevelt maybe the clearest example.  He was determined to find justices who would uphold New Deallegislation.  Richard Nixon wanted justices who would limit the rights of people accused ofcrimes, and that's sort of one model.
And then you have Presidents who did not have any particular agenda.  And I think PresidentEisenhower is an example.  He appointed three of the great justices of the 20th century --Chief Justice Warren, Justice Harlan, Justice Brennan.  But his appointees came from differentbackgrounds, no identifiable tendency in the way they thought about the Constitution. 
So do you see yourself as one of those models, or something different from both?
President Obama:  There’s no doubt that in making my appointments, the values of thejustice matter to me.  And what I mean by that is not how they’d rule on a particular issue. In fact, we're very careful when I interview candidates not to ask them about a particular caseor controversy that might make it seem as if I want a particular outcome.  But what I've beenconsistently looking for -- and this is what I saw in Justice Sotomayor, what I saw in JusticeKagan -- is people who, number one, have intellectual integrity.  And what that means is, isthat they look at the facts and the law, and even if it's uncomfortable to them, they don't likethe outcome, they follow the law, and they recognize that that's their job.
Number two, that they bring a humanity to the job.  And what I mean by that is that,particularly on the Supreme Court, nine out of 10 cases -- well, certainly in the federal courts-- nine out of 10 cases we can probably arrive at an outcome just by applying basic tenets toconstitutional interpretation.  There’s not going to be a lot of controversy.  The cases thatreally matter are the ones where there’s ambiguity, where there’s a lack of clarity, where itrequires constitutional principles being applied in a way that is true to precedent, is true tobasic legal tenets, but also that understands the unique role of the Court in making sure thatpeople who are locked out of the political process, for example, are not permanently lockedout, that they have some recourse; that we have justices who understand how the worldworks so that they are not entirely blind to the history of racial discrimination or genderdiscrimination, or how money operates in our world. 
  
Not because that necessarily leads them to rule on a particular issue, but because it meansthat when they’re looking at a tough case in which statute or the Constitution does notprovide an immediate, ready answer, that they can apply judgment, grounded in how weactually live and the ideals and principles that have made this such an extraordinary country. I want them to have lived a little and be able to see the wide spectrum of people that they’regoing to be wielding this enormous power over.
And so, a lot of times when I talk to the candidates for the judiciary, I spend time askingabout their families and them growing up, and what were formative experiences in theirminds.  And in some ways, that reveals more than anything. 
And part of the reason that I think Merrick Garland would be such an extraordinary judge isnot just because he’s already been an extraordinary judge, but I think about his life story. And I mentioned this in the introduction -- when he was a high school kid, as classvaledictorian, he’s got a student speaking ahead of him who lambasts the Vietnam War, andparents are trying to unplug the guy’s mic, and Merrick comes in and -- not because henecessarily agrees with the student, but, impromptu, provides a vigorous defense of freespeech.  As a 17- or 18-year-old kid -- that tells me something about him.  It gives meconfidence that this is somebody who’s thought about what our core values and ethics are asa society. 
When you hear about the work he did in the Oklahoma City bombing, and he’s presiding overthe investigation at the Justice Department, and the fact that he was meticulous in how heconducted that investigation, and didn’t cut corners -- even though, in the wake of those kindsof terrorist attacks, oftentimes it's convenient, because people aren't going to call you on it, tocut corners -- and at the same time, how he kept the program mourning the deceased fromthe memorial because he knew that each one of those people who had been killed, and eachone of those families had been affected in such profound ways -- that tells me somethingabout who he is.
And that, as much as anything, I think is going to give me confidence that that's the kind ofperson where, if I'm before a judge, I want to make sure that I've got somebody who’s wiseand who cares about people and is not arbitrary, and can provide confidence to the justicesystem.  And I also think part of the reason I thought Merrick was ideal now is preciselybecause of all the polarization we were talking about earlier.  What a good moment for us tohave somebody who is respected by both sides, and who Chief Justice Roberts served with onthe Appellate Court and befriended, and consistently said -- despite being on the opposite
  
ends of a bunch of decisions -- said this is somebody who, if he says you're wrong, you’ve gotto think long and hard about it. 
He embodies and models what it is that we want to see in our juris prudence.
Professor Strauss:  Let me sort of pick up on that.  I mean, as you know, some people onthe left were disappointed with your choice of Chief Judge Garland.  They thought you shouldhave appointed someone who would be more aggressive in moving the Court in a certaindirection.  And I just -- I guess what I want to say is, those of us who knew you “back then”could have said you shouldn’t be surprised, because if I remember correctly -- and correct meif I don't -- when you were teaching constitutional law, there are people in that line of workwho hold up the Warren Court as the model and say the Court’s job is to be really on the frontlines of attacking society’s problems. And if I remember correctly, you were skeptical of thatwhen you were a law professor.  So am I right in remembering that, and has the skepticismcarried over?
President Obama:  No, no, I think you're right about this.  It's an adage in con law, andyou're familiar with this -- probably the students are too -- that the courts are a terrific shield,but they’re not always a very effective sword.  And what I mean by that is, is that there havebeen moments in history -- Brown v. Board of Education being the best example, and on theother end of the spectrum, a decision like Dred Scott, which was antithetical to what we wantto see a court do -- there are certain moments where, like in Brown, that democracy hasbroken down in a fundamental way.  The majority has shut down access for the petitions forredress from a minority group.  There are times where an individual who is engaging in, let’ssay, highly unpopular speech is not going to be able, through the political process, to upholdthe values that we, collectively, have decided are pretty important to uphold.
And so, in those circumstances, I have a very progressive view of how the courts shouldoperate.  But as I think Judge Garland said, being a federal judge doesn’t mean that you havethis broad writ to simply remake society.  Ideally, you’ve got a political process that doesthat; that we argue about issues, and we elect representatives, and we get votes, and wepass bills, and we get a new administration and they overturn stuff that we passed.  And it'srough, and it's tumble, and it's not always elegant, but that's the constitutional design.  And ithas the benefit of making sure that separation of powers and decentralization of power in oursociety keeps this lumbering ship moving in a pretty good direction.
  
And so it's been rare -- and this is by design -- that the Court engages in massive socialengineering.  Now, I care deeply about -- there are a whole range of progressive causes that Iwill continue to fight for as long as I have a breath.  I believe in a society that is doingsomething about climate change in an aggressive way.  I believe in a society in which everychild is able to get a decent education and opportunity.  I believe that everybody should havehealth care in a society that's wealthy -- it's not a privilege, it's a right.    I believe that ourcriminal justice system is flawed in a whole range of ways.
A couple of weeks ago, or maybe it was last week, I had lunch with a sampling of the peoplethat I've pardoned for nonviolent drug offenses.  And I've got a woman sitting next to mewho, at a very young age, in her early 20s, was sentenced to life in prison for a nonviolentdrug offense.  That's crazy.  It makes no sense.  It was unjust and counterproductive, andleaves huge scars not just in that woman’s family and her children, but in our society as awhole.
So there are a whole bunch of things I've done as President and I intend to continue to do andto advocate for.  Those are not things, though, that typically a Supreme Court justice is in theposition to get done.  They don't have taxing power.  They don't necessarily have theexpertise to be designing programs to get at the things that we care about.  And so I do havea modesty in terms of my expectations for what the Court should do.
But I want the court to do what it should do really well.  I want a court that does believe thatequality under the law is equality under the law -- not just the words, but that it isoperationalized, that it's real.  I want a court that is treating a poor indigent criminaldefendant the same as a wealthy criminal defendant, and that justice is blind with respect to -
- she agrees with me.   
So modesty in the scope and the nature of what the law is, but doing really well what theCourt is designed to do -- that's what I'm looking for in a justice.
Professor Strauss:  I think we can open it up. 
President Obama:  Let’s open it up to questions.  There you go, a little Socratic methodhere.    State the case!   No, I'm teasing.  I'm teasing.  This young lady right here in thegreen -- yes.  Do we have a mic?  Let’s give them mics so everybody can hear you.  Introduceyourself, by the way.
Question:  Hi.
  
President Obama:  Hi.
Question:  My name is Amelia.
President Obama:  Hey, Amelia.
Question:  I actually had the opportunity to ask you a question when I was 15 years old, inNew Hampshire. 
President Obama:  Wow.   
Question:  So I'm really happy to --
President Obama:  Are you a student here now?
Question:  I am.
President Obama:  That's very cool.  Did I answer your question the last time?
Question:  You did, very well.   
President Obama:  Thank goodness.  All right, what do you got?
Question:  So I'm really happy to hear that you said you were going to continue to push forthe issues that you care about, because I, of course, believe that the push for the SupremeCourt nomination is incredibly important.  I'm just a little concerned that other issues couldget left behind.  One such issue, for example, is criminal justice reform -- specifically, theproblem of mass incarceration.  So I was wondering if you could speak to what more you’ll doin your last 10 months to address this issue.
President Obama:  Great.  It's a great question.  We're in this really interesting momentwhere generally Congress is thoroughly unproductive -- not, by the way, because of themembers of Congress who are here -- who are all doing great work -- but in the aggregate it’snot doing much. 
One exception has been this growing interest, this movement in criminal justice reform.  Andit’s bipartisan and it’s sincere on the part of all sides on this.  And it’s an interest convergence.
  
You have fiscal conservatives who have been seeing how expensive it is to incarcerate peopleyear after year after year, and how it’s breaking the bank -- particularly at the state level,where if you track spending on public education and spending on incarceration over the last25, 30 years, there is almost a direct line between more people in jail and less support forpublic universities, for example.  So there’s a fiscal concern.
You've got a libertarian strand of conservatives who really believe why is it the government’sbusiness if somebody is taking -- smoking pot, let’s say, and why would we want to jail themfor 20 years?  You've got a very sincere evangelical movement that oftentimes is involved inreentry programs or prison ministries, and so have embraced the idea of a second chance. 
And so you combine that with law enforcement that I think has begun to recognize that a lotof how we have prosecuted the war on drugs has been unproductive, and that recidivism isinevitable if people are getting no skills.  They're incarcerated for decades, and then we're justreleasing them with no possible support.  And then the long-standing progressive view that alot of our criminal justice system has been tainted by racial discrimination and class bias.  Allthose things are converging.
And so now we've got some really interesting coalitions.  You’ve got the ACLU and the Kochbrothers agreeing on this, which does not happen often.    Dick Durbin has been one of thekey leaders in the Senate in shaping a criminal justice reform bill that has a real chance ofpassage.  And I think it’s really important to understand the nomination process with JudgeGarland is not holding back our ability to move forward.
It would be one thing if Mitch McConnell was saying, man, it’s going to take so long toschedule all the hearings and the votes, and we won’t have time because we're just so busythat we can't then do criminal justice instead.  But since there has been a spike in the numberof days off in this Congress, and, typically, a judicial confirmation takes less than threemonths from the time that person is nominated -- Judge Alito, for example, took 82 days --this is something that shouldn’t prevent us from getting done the criminal justice issues.
I think what’s been tougher is just managing the traditional politics around being soft on crimeversus being tough on crime.  And right now because crime rates -- sadly except for in certainneighborhoods in Chicago and a few other cities -- have been going down in ways that areremarkable and nobody can fully explain, there is less profit in saying I’m going to be toughon crime.
  
But there is always a hesitance on the part of legislators because very rarely is a politicianpunished for having been too tough on crime and sentencing.  But occasionally, á la WillieHorton, they feel that a vote that can be perceived as lenient might come back to bite them.
The good news is that, so far at least, people have stuck with it.  And I’m modestly optimisticthat we can get something done this year.  It won’t solve the problem of mass incarceration --because that was a process that took 20, 30 years to get to where we are now, where weaccount for 5 percent of the world’s population and 25 percent of the world’s prisoners, so it’sgoing to take some time to reverse.  But the legislation that's pending right now providesmeaningful reductions in the standards for sentencing around nonviolent drug crimes.  It doessome very important work in terms of reentry, diversion programs.  It breaks this psychologythat we just have to lock people up in order to keep ourselves safe.
One last element to this that has been interesting is the opioids crisis that some of you mayhave read about.  Right now painkillers -- overdoses of people taking painkillers kills morepeople than traffic accidents.  It’s a remarkable statistic.  There has been this huge spike inpainkiller addiction, which is then leading to heroin addiction, because oftentimes heroin ischeaper than painkillers.  And four out of five people who get addicted to heroin start theiraddiction with OxyContin or some other painkiller addiction.  And unlike crack, it’s not justaffecting inner-city African American or Latino communities.  It’s widespread.  It’s pervasive. It’s seeping into rural areas. And it’s a tragic issue that we are really spending a lot of timefocused on.
But what’s interesting is, is that the politics of this changes a little bit where when electedofficials see kids who are like their kids getting hooked and going through these terriblethings, there’s been a greater predisposition to think of this as a public health issue ratherthan a criminal justice and incarceration issue.
And that's -- I’m just being blunt -- that's the truth.  But it actually has had an impact interms of an openness I think to re-examining some of our drug laws.
Good question.  I’m sure your question eight years ago was really good, too.  
All right, I’m going to go boy-girl-boy-girl just to make sure this is fair.  We monitor thesethings.     Yes, gentleman right here, in the tie.  You.  Yes, you look sharp.    Do you wear atie every day to class?  That's good, man.
Question:  I’m Jimmy.  I’m also a 1L.  I’ve never asked you a question before.  
  
President Obama:  Okay.
Question:  So this might not go very well.    But I’ve written it down so hopefully I can readit.  Mr. President, we are currently in the midst of a polarizing, political election cycle dividingboth major parties along populist and establishment fault lines.  Do you anticipate thisdivergence within the Democratic Party widening to the extent we saw with the tea party’semergence within the ranks of the Republican Party?  And if not, what do you worry about forthe future of the Democratic Party?
President Obama:  Short answer is, no, I don't.  The cleavages inside the Democratic Partyare not comparable to what we're seeing in the Republican Party right now.  The argumentinside the Democratic Party is a little bit more about means, less about ends. 
If you look at our two Democratic candidates, they believe that everybody should get healthcare.  They believe that every child should get a good education.  They believe that climatechange is real and that we should do something about it.  They believe in equality for theLGBT community.  Right?  If you go through the list, there’s not a huge divergence there.
I think that in the Democratic Party, there is a populist impulse that grows out of what I alsothink has happened for folks who are voting in the Republican primary, this frustration in thewake of the financial crisis and the bottom falling out for people who lost their jobs, or losttheir homes, or lost their pensions; that the world is moving fast, the ground is not firm undertheir feet.  And even before that crisis, wages and incomes were not going up at the samepace as productivity, corporate profits, and so forth.  And so there is a sense the game isrigged.  And we have to more fundamentally change that game, that system -- whether it’sWall Street, or how Washington operates, or what have you.
Some of that impulse is healthy.  I think you want people to be asking hard questions aboutinjustice economically and the way that insiders in the political process may not fullyrepresent the interest of everyone.
The danger, whether for Democrats or Republicans, is in a closed-loop system whereeverybody is just listening to the people who agree with them, that you start thinking the wayto get to where I want to go is to simply be as uncompromising as possible, and hold the line,and not pay attention or listen to what the other side has to say.  And that is sort of a teaparty mentality.
  
And that anybody who suggests, well, there’s another point of view, or there’s a whole half ofthe country that completely disagrees with us that we have to work with, well, then you mustbe a sellout, or you must be corrupted, or you must be on the take, or what have you.
And that is not, I think, useful.  It’s not say that there isn’t corruption, that there isn’tcompromise -- people compromising principles for less-than-noble means, et cetera.  Thosethings happen and they should be called out.
But a lot of the reason why a lot of Democrats who supported me and still support me gotfrustrated is because a bunch of the country doesn't agree with me or them, and they havevotes, too, and they elect members of Congress.  And that's how our democracy works.  It’snot a situation, if you don't get everything you want, it’s always because the person youelected sold you out.  It may just be because in our system you send up taking half loaves. 
I could not be prouder of the Affordable Care Act, but it was a messy process.  It doesn't havea public option.  It’s not single-payer.  If I were designing a system from scratch, I wouldhave designed a more elegant system and a more efficient system.  But that's not what waspossible in our democracy -- in the same way that Social Security when it first started was ameagerly program providing benefits to just a few people and historically cut out for purelyracist reasons domestic servants or sharecroppers or what have you.  And then over time youkept on improving it.  That's how change generally happens.
And I think the thing that Democrats have to guard against is going in the direction that theRepublicans are much further along on, and that is this sense of we are just going to get ourway, and if we don't, then we'll cannibalize our own and then kick them out and try again, andwe narrow our viewpoints more and more until finally we stake out positions that are soextreme that they alienate the broad public.
I don't see that being where the Democrats go.  But it's always something that we have topay attention to.
Question:  Thank you so much for being here.  I'd like to know how have your views on theSupreme Court nomination process changed since you taught constitutional law here at theUniversity of Chicago.
  
President Obama:  My views on how it should work hasn’t changed.  My views on how itcurrently works obviously are a source of frustration.  Look, just to kind of wrap up thisSupreme Court conversation, I think it is perfectly acceptable for Republicans to decide thateven though Merrick Garland is highly qualified, even though he’s indisputably a good and fairjudge, even though he’s gotten the highest ratings from all the bar organizations and othersthat have examined his record, that I just don't agree with him on X, Y, Z, and I'm going tovote against him because I believe in something different on important issues. 
What’s not acceptable is not giving him a vote, not giving him a hearing, not meeting withhim.  What’s not acceptable, I believe, is the increasing use of the filibuster for somebodywho’s clearly within the mainstream, or to essentially say that we are going to nullify theability of a President who is from another party from making an appointment.  And we'regoing to wait to see if maybe we can get a guy from our party to make the appointment.  Thatis where you have a process foul that corrodes the ability of the Court to function effectively. 
If you play out how much of a problem this could end up being -- if, in fact, Mitch McConnellsticks to not giving a hearing and not giving a vote, and let’s say, from their perspective,everything works out great and their nominee, whoever that might be, wins and takes overthe White House, and they, then, make an appointment -- the notion that Democrats wouldthen say, oh, well, we'll just go along with that -- that is inconceivable.  Right?
So now the Democrats say, well, what’s good for the goose is good for the gander, we'll waitfour more years to see how the next President comes in, at which point what’s most likelythen is Mitch McConnell will then eliminate the filibuster possibility for Supreme Court justices,as it was eliminated for the other judicial appointments.  And now it's just a majoritarianexercise inside the Senate of who controls the presidency and who controls the Senate.  And ifdifferent parties control the White House and the Senate during that period of time, you're notgoing to get any appointments done -- which is a disaster for the courts, generally. 
For two reasons.  One is, there’s a lot of work that needs to get done and you need judges. And right now, there are emergency situations in districts across the country.  But the secondthing that happens is people will, at that point, just become more and more cynical aboutdecisions that are coming down from the Court.  They’re already cynical because so much ofso many opinions just end up being straight 5-4, and it starts feeling like this is just a partisanalignment.  But it gets much worse under these circumstances.  People then just view thecourts as an extension of our political parties -- polarized political parties. 
  
And if confidence in the courts consistently breaks down, then you start seeing our attitudesabout democracy generally starting to break down, a legitimacy breaking down in ways thatare very dangerous. 
It's a gentleman’s turn.  Right here in the front.  I am impressed by the way you guys did allget dressed up.    Was there a memo sent out?  Did the Dean say, you guys, we want you toall -- because you aren't going to class like this.    I know.  I remember.   
Question:  Hello, Mr. President.  Thank you very much for being here with us today.  I'm a 2Lhere at the law school.  My question for you is, what sorts of constitutional questions were atthe forefront of your mind when deciding who your nominee should be?  And what sorts ofconstitutional questions do you think Americans should be asking themselves when assessingyour selection and thinking about the 2016 presidential election?
President Obama:  Well, I will tell you, as I said before, I'm very careful not to delve toospecifically into a candidate’s position on live issues.  You're a well-informed 2L, you know theissues that people debate.  There’s a standard set of social issues that have been roilingsociety and the courts for a long time -- whether it's LGBT rights, or abortion, or civil rights. 
What’s interesting is there are a set of new issues that are going to be coming up that, foryour generation, I think are going to be increasingly salient.  One great example is this wholedebate around encryption, which I think is just the tip of the iceberg of what we're going tohave to figure out.  In a society in which so much of your life is digitized, people have a wholenew set of privacy expectations that are understandable.  They also expect, though, that sincetheir lives are all digitized, that the digital world is safe, which creates a contradictory demandon government -- protect me from hackers, protect me from terrorists, protect me from etcetera, et cetera, et cetera, but I don't want you to know any of your [sic] business and Idon't even want you to have the ability to investigate some of that business when it happensbecause there’s broader implications and we're worried about Big Brother.  And so there’sgoing to be a whole series of issues around that that I think will be coming up.
I think there are a range of economic issues that date back very far, to the earliest days of theCourt and were prominent during the Great Depression and FDR’s era that have gone intoabeyance -- people don't pay attention to them as much in terms of monopoly concentration,or antitrust issues, et cetera -- but I think in this current environment are going to be comingmore prominent over time.
  
And then, political participation issues and voting issues I think, and money in politics issues -
- that's a whole series of issues that I do believe are an important role for the Court to play. Because if we're not effectively setting the rules of the political process, if that isdelegitimized, then whatever outcomes are generated are subject to just endless contention. 
And this is separate from the judiciary.  This is your President editorializing.    We really arethe only advanced democracy on Earth that systematically and purposely makes it really hardfor people to vote.  And we sort of take it for granted.  I mean, we sort of just assume, yeah,that's I guess how it is.  There’s no other country on Earth that does that.  And there’s alegacy to that that grows directly out of a history in which first property men, then white men,then white folks didn’t want women, minorities to participate in the political process and beable to empower themselves in that fashion.
Now, that's the history.  We should be a society in which, at this point, we said, yeah, thathistory wasn’t so good, that's not who we are, and there was a Civil War fought about all thisstuff, and we passed a whole series of laws like the Voting Rights Act, and at this point weshould be at the point where we say, you know what, we want everybody to vote becausethat's the essence of our democracy.  But we have not just federal laws, but state laws, thatunabashedly discourage people from voting -- which is why we have some of the lowestvoting rates of any advanced democracy in the world. 
And that's a problem.  That's not something that -- I'm saying that to Congress, as well as tothe presidency, as well as to governors, as well as state legislators, as well as to courts. Thatcan't be right!  There’s no justification for that!  You can't defend it! 
And I've always said -- and this goes back to the young man’s question earlier about politicalpolarization -- maybe the single biggest change that we could make in our political processthat would reduce some of the polarization, make people feel more invested, restore integrityto the system, would be just make sure everybody is voting.  Australia has got mandatoryvoting.  You start getting 70-80 percent voting rates, that's transformative.
All right.  How much time do we have, by the way?  How many?
Moderator:  Time for one more.
President Obama:  We'll take two.  The young lady in the green, right there in the sweater. Yes, that's you.  Yes. You didn’t remember what you were wearing today, did you?   
  
Question:  So I think we can agree that in our nation, we celebrate diversity.  Diversity ofethnicity is the basis, the background.  And I'm just wondering -- well, of course, U of Chicagois a diversity of ideas.  I'm just wondering what diverse characteristics Judge Garland wouldbring to the Supreme Court.
President Obama:  Well, he’s from Skokie -- which is very important.  It's a great place.  It'sa great town.  The way I've thought about diversity is not to think about any single seat as,oh, I've got to fill this slot with this demographic, but rather if I've got a broad set ofnominees to make -- and this is true across the board -- how do I make sure that I'mintentional throughout that process so that the talent of every American is, and everypotential candidate gets a fair look, and I have confidence that if I stick to that, if I do that, ifI make sure that I'm broadening the search, broadening the pool, looking at a bunch of folkseven if they’re not going through the conventional paths, that I'll end up -- the process willresult in diversity.
And that, in fact, is what’s happened.  I am -- not to brag, but I have transformed the federalcourts from a diversity standpoint with a record that's been unmatched.    We've got moreAfrican Americans on the circuit courts than we ever has before.  We've got -- I've appointedmore African American women to the federal courts than any other President before.  I'veappointed more Latinos than any President before.  I've appointed more Native Americans,more Asian Americans, more LGBT judges than ever before. 
But at no point did I say, oh, you know what, I need a black lesbian from Skokie -- in thatslot.  Can you find me one?    I mean, that's just not how I've approached it.  It turns out thatif the process is fair and you are saying that it's important that our courts are reflective of achanging society, you’ll end up with a really good cross-section of people who are excellent. And that's who we've been able to appoint.
And so, when I looked at Merrick Garland, that was the person that -- the difference betweenthe Supreme Court is just a handful of seats come up at any given time now.  I appointed aLatino woman and another woman right before that, so, yeah, he’s a white guy, but he’s areally outstanding jurist.  Sorry.    I think that's important.
But this speaks to the broader debate about diversity that I think is important and obviouslychurns up in college campuses a lot.  The question is, have you set up a process and are youintentional about giving everybody a shot?  And are you thinking about roadblocks to whywe're not seeing a more diverse population?  And when you start asking those questions -- inwhatever institution.
  
I mean, I just met with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the CombatantCommanders, our key military leaders.  And the U.S. military, interestingly, has probablydone as good of a job as any institution in our society when it comes to integration andbringing diverse people in, but, as you go up the ranks, you start seeing that it becomes lessand less reflective of the broader population and the troops, the men and women in uniformwho are coming in.
And so we had a really interesting conversation about what’s happening?  How much of this isthat the young African American or Latino officer, or woman officer isn't mentored by theperson right above them, and steered into particular assignments that are less likely toachieve a promotion?  And what can we do about a different set of financial burdens that mayexist?  And if a lot of those folks are going in as enlisted men and women, because that's theopportunity that was presented to them and  nobody told them they could apply to WestPoint, what are we doing to find outstanding enlisteds, and saying, you’d make a good officerand we're going to groom you?
And all of that -- that's not as satisfying as, when it comes to publicity, as just checking a boxand saying, look, I appointed this person or that person in any particular slot.  But that'swhere you start changing systems, and you start changing institutions, and you end up with areally broad-based change in access.  And that's something that I really care deeply aboutbecause, just as is true in the military, it's true generally.  Look, our society is changing.  Youcannot have a successful America if we are leaving out big chunks of the population fromopportunity and leadership.  It just doesn’t work.
And it's the same argument I make internationally in countries that are still repressing women-- saying, your society cannot work, it doesn’t work if more than half your population isconstrained.  If the half of that population that is most likely to be raising your children andteaching the next generation is not getting opportunity, your society will fail over the longterm.  And that's just true generally.
All right, one last question. 
Question:  What happens --
President Obama:  Excuse me, you were not called on.    And you are a journalist.  And I'mcalling on students.  So, thank you very much.  This wasn’t a press conference. 
So, let’s just see -- it's a gentleman’s turn.  This gentleman right there. 
  
Question:  Hi, my name is Seth.  I'm a 3L.  If you don't mind me reading my question --
President Obama:  It's okay.  This is what I was saying about you guys and your phones.   By the way, are you now  -- I'm assuming you can't carry your phones into court, can you?
Question:  Actually, it depends.   
President Obama:  I'm going to say, you guys might want to practice --
Question:  I'll try to work on that.    So one issue that Judge Garland would likely never beable to consider if he were confirmed concerns the President’s authority to conduct dronestrikes away from active battlefields.  And these are strikes that you have continuouslyauthorized on the basis of vague legal standards that you unilaterally deem to be satisfied ineach case without ever appearing before a court, and in the process killing hundreds ofinnocent civilians as well as, in some cases, American citizens.  So my question is, how arethese killings morally and legally justified?  And what kind of message does this droneprogram send about America’s values to the world, the American people, and to law studentslike myself who refuse to put our trust in an opaque process?
President Obama:  I think that's a great question -- although I will say that I will disputesome of the underlying premises that you asserted as facts.  But I think it's an importanttopic, and it's a fair one. 
When I came into office, we were still in the midst of two wars, in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Andin the border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, al Qaida was still highly active.  Anddrone technologies began to develop in parallel with -- had developed prior to my presidency,but started to really accelerate in terms of the technology and the precision with which strikescould be taken. 
And the challenge for me as Commander-in-Chief has consistently been how do you thinkabout this new technology in a way that is consistent with morality, ideals, laws of war, but isalso consistent with my first priority as President and Commander-in-Chief, which is to keepall of you safe, including you.
And so I think it’s fair to say that in the first couple of years of my presidency, thearchitecture -- legal architecture, administrative architecture, command structures -- aroundhow these were utilized was underdeveloped relative to how fast the technology was moving.  
  
So another way of saying this is our military or our intelligence teams started seeing this asreally effective.  And they started just going because the goal was let’s get al Qaeda, let’s getthese leaders.  There’s a training camp here.  There’s a high-value target there.  Let’s move. And it was -- the decision-making was not ad hoc, but it was embedded in decisions that aremade all the time about a commander leading a military operation, or an intelligence teamtrying to take out a terrorist.  And there wasn’t enough of an overarching structure, right?
So you may recall -- but if not, I’m sure we can send it to you -- I gave a speech at theNational Defense University in which I said that we have to create an architecture for thisbecause the potential for abuse -- given the remoteness of these weapons and their lethality,we've got to come up with a structure that governs how we're approaching it.  And that's whatwe've done.  So I’ve put forward what’s called a presidential directive.  It’s basically a set ofadministrative guidelines whereby these weapons are being used.
Now, we actually did put forward a non-classified version of what those directives look like. And it says that you can't use these weapons unless you have near certainty that there willnot be civilian casualties; that you have near certainty that the targets you are hitting are, infact, terrorist organizations that are intending to do imminent harm to the United States.  Andyou've got all the agencies who are involved in that process, they have to get together andapprove that.  And it goes to the highest, most senior levels of our government in order for usto make those decisions.
And what I’ve also said that we need to start creating a process whereby this -- wherebypublic accountability is introduced so that you or citizens or members of Congress outside ofthe Intelligence Committee can look at the facts and see whether or not we're abiding by whatwe say are these norms.
And we're actually -- there’s a lot of legal aspects to this because part of the problem here is,is that this drone program initially came through the intelligence side under classifiedprograms, as opposed to the military.  Part of what I’ve also said is I don't want ourintelligence agencies being a paramilitary organization.  That's not their function.  As much aspossible this should be done through our Defense Department so that we can report, here’swhat we did, here’s why we did it, here’s our assessment of what happened. 
And so slowly we are pushing it in that direction. My hope is, is that by the time I leave officethere is not only an internal structure in place that governs these standards that we’ve set,but there is also an institutionalized process whereby the actions that the U.S. government
  
takes through drone technology are consistently reported on, on an annualized basis so thatpeople can look.
And the reason this is really important to me -- and this was implied in your question -- isthere is a lot of misinformation about this.  There is no doubt -- and I said this in an interviewI think recently -- there is no doubt that some innocent people have been killed by dronestrikes.  It is not true that it has been this sort of willy-nilly, let’s bomb a village.  That is nothow folks have operated.  And what I can say with great certainty is that the rate of civiliancasualties in any drone operation are far lower than the rate of civilian casualties that occur inconventional war. 
So the irony -- let’s take an example like the bin Laden raid.  This was as precise, as effectivean operation that I don't think anybody would dispute was in the national security interests ofthe United States.  And we put our best people in there who operate as precisely and aseffectively as any group of individuals probably ever have in the history of the planet.  Andthey executed their mission flawlessly.  But there were a number of people who were killed inthat who you might describe as not the targets of the mission -- members of bin Laden’sfamily, for example.  Now, that would be counted as a civilian casualty under the standardsfrom which you drew your information.  And if you calculated it as a percent, there wasactually a pretty high civilian casualty rate for this extraordinarily precise mission. 
Now, imagine during the height of the Iraq war, or when we were still actively fighting inAfghanistan, the number of civilians who were killed in normal military operations.  We talkabout the number of U.S. troops that were killed in Iraq.  The number of Iraqis that werekilled -- primarily by AQI and those we were fighting, but also by U.S. military that was tryingto be as careful as possible in chaotic situations, like Fallujah or Ramadi -- were in the tens ofthousands.
So part of my job as President is to figure out how I can keep America safe doing the leastdamage possible in really tough, bad situations.  And I don't have the luxury of just not doinganything and then being able to stand back and feel as if my conscience is completely clear.  Ihave to make decisions because there are folks out there who are genuinely trying to kill usand would be happy to blow up this entire room without any compunction, and are activelytrying to find ways to do it.
  
And I wish I could just send in Iron Man -- no, no, I don't mean that as a joke.  I just mean Iwish that the tragedy of war, conflict, terrorism, et cetera, did not end up creatingcircumstances where we, wielding kinetic power, don't end up hurting anybody who shouldn’thave been hurt. 
But what I try to do is to set up the system as best as I can.  And I think it is very importantfor those who are critics of the U.S. government -- and this includes folks on the outside -- toexamine the incredible progress that we've made over the course of a couple of decades. Because this conversation didn't even exist, it did not even cross the minds of people in theWhite House as recently as 30 or 40 years ago.  I mean, it wasn’t even a factor.  And weanguish over this in a very serious way.
But what I do think is a legitimate concern is, is that the transparency issues.  I think that theway that this got built up through our intelligence and what’s called our Title 50 programsmeant that it did not -- it wasn’t subject to the same amount of democratic debate as whenwe are conducting what are called Title 10 Department of Defense conventional operations. And that's done a disservice not only to the public being able to examine where we mademistakes and create corrective action, it’s actually also done a disservice to the incrediblydedicated men and women in intelligence and in operations who perform these operationswho are subject to accusations that somehow they're irresponsible and bloodless and goingaround blowing up children, which is not the case. 
And our popular media I think has been able to just project a whole bunch of scenarios thatare generally not accurate.
I guess I should stop there.  But thank you for the question.  It was a legitimate one.
I’ll end where I started.  Just based on the quality of the questions and your very sharpappearances -- you guys have an enormous amount to contribute.  Don't let the day-to-daynoise and news and frustrations with our democracy discourage you from being involved. 
I’m phasing out of this particular part of my life.  But I’ve said this before -- and I believed itwhen I was teaching here, I believe it even more now after having been President -- the mostimportant office in a democracy is the office of citizen.  I really believe that.  Change happenswhen citizens are informed, are engaged, are paying attention, are asking tough questions --asking tough questions of themselves, by the way, not just of others -- not too comfortable inwhatever dogmas that we all attach ourselves to.  And you are learning the kind of criticalthinking in this school that will allow you to become really good citizens.
  
Use it.
Thanks.
Professor Strauss:  Thank you, Mr. President.
