Let me begin by thanking Harris Wofford for his contributions to this country. In so manydifferent ways, he exemplifies what we mean by the word "citizen." And so we are verygrateful to him for all the work he has done; and I'm thankful for the gracious and thoughtfulintroduction.
"We the people, in order to form a more perfect union." Two hundred and twenty one yearsago, in a hall that still stands across the street, a group of men gathered and, with thesesimple words, launched America's improbable experiment in democracy. Farmers andscholars, statesmen and patriots who had traveled across the ocean to escape tyranny andpersecution finally made real their Declaration of Independence at a Philadelphia conventionthat lasted through the spring of 1787.
The document they produced was eventually signed, but ultimately unfinished. It was stainedby this nation's original sin of slavery, a question that divided the colonies and brought theconvention to a stalemate until the founders chose to allow the slave trade to continue for atleast 20 more years, and to leave any final resolution to future generations. Of course, theanswer to the slavery question was already embedded within our Constitution -- aConstitution that had at is very core the ideal of equal citizenship under the law; aConstitution that promised its people liberty and justice, and a union that could be and shouldbe perfected over time.

And yet words on a parchment would not be enough to deliver slaves from bondage, orprovide men and women of every color and creed their full rights and obligations as citizens ofthe United States. What would be needed were Americans in successive generations who werewilling to do their part -- through protests and struggles, on the streets and in the courts,through a civil war and civil disobedience, and always at great risk -- to narrow that gapbetween the promise of our ideals and the reality of their time.
This was one of the tasks we set forth at the beginning of this presidential campaign: tocontinue the long march of those who came before us, a march for a more just, more equal,more free, more caring, and more prosperous America. I chose to run for President at thismoment in history because I believe deeply that we cannot solve the challenges of our timeunless we solve them together, unless we perfect our union by understanding that we mayhave different stories, but we hold common hopes; that we may not look the same and maynot have come from the same place, but we all want to move in the same direction: towards abetter future for our children and our grandchildren. And this belief comes from my unyieldingfaith in the decency and generosity of the American people. But it also comes from my ownstory.
I'm the son of a black man from Kenya and a white woman from Kansas. I was raised with thehelp of a white grandfather who survived a Depression to serve in Patton's army during WorldWar II, and a white grandmother who worked on a bomber assembly line at Fort Leavenworthwhile he was overseas. I've gone to some of the best schools in America and I've lived in oneof the world's poorest nations. I am married to a black American who carries within her theblood of slaves and slave owners, an inheritance we pass on to our two precious daughters. Ihave brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews, uncles, and cousins of every race and every huescattered across three continents. And for as long as I live, I will never forget that in no othercountry on earth is my story even possible. It's a story that hasn't made me the mostconventional of candidates. But it is a story that has seared into my genetic makeup the ideathat this nation is more than the sum of its parts -- that out of many, we are truly one.
Now throughout the first year of this campaign, against all predictions to the contrary, we sawhow hungry the American people were for this message of unity. Despite the temptation toview my candidacy through a purely racial lens, we won commanding victories in states withsome of the whitest populations in the country. In South Carolina, where the Confederate flagstill flies, we built a powerful coalition of African Americans and white Americans. This is not tosay that race has not been an issue in this campaign. At various stages in the campaign, somecommentators have deemed me either "too black" or "not black enough." We saw racialtensions bubble to the surface during the week before the South Carolina primary. The presshas scoured every single exit poll for the latest evidence of racial polarization, not just interms of white and black, but black and brown as well.

And yet, it's only been in the last couple of weeks that the discussion of race in this campaignhas taken a particularly divisive turn. On one end of the spectrum, we've heard the implicationthat my candidacy is somehow an exercise in affirmative action; that it's based solely on thedesire of wild and wide-eyed liberals to purchase racial reconciliation on the cheap. On theother end, we've heard my former pastor, Jeremiah Wright, use incendiary language toexpress views that have the potential not only to widen the racial divide, but views thatdenigrate both the greatness and the goodness of our nation and that rightly offend white andblack alike.
Now I've already condemned, in unequivocal terms, the statements of Reverend Wright thathave caused such controversy, and in some cases, pain. For some, nagging questions remain:Did I know him to be an occasionally fierce critic of American domestic and foreign policy? Ofcourse. Did I ever hear him make remarks that could be considered controversial while I sat inthe church? Yes. Did I strongly disagree with many of his political views? Absolutely, just asI'm sure many of you have heard remarks from your pastors, priests, or rabbis with which youstrongly disagree.
But the remarks that have caused this recent firestorm weren't simply controversial. Theyweren't simply a religious leader's efforts to speak out against perceived injustice. Instead,they expressed a profoundly distorted view of this country, a view that sees white racism asendemic and that elevates what is wrong with America above all that we know is right withAmerica; a view that sees the conflicts in the Middle East as rooted primarily in the actions ofstalwart allies like Israel instead of emanating from the perverse and hateful ideologies ofradical Islam.
As such, Reverend Wright's comments were not only wrong but divisive, divisive at a timewhen we need unity; racially charged at a time when we need to come together to solve a setof monumental problems: two wars, a terrorist threat, a falling economy, a chronic healthcare crisis, and potentially devastating climate change -- problems that are neither black orwhite or Latino or Asian, but rather problems that confront us all.
Given my background, my politics, and my professed values and ideals, there will no doubt bethose for whom my statements of condemnation are not enough. Why associate myself withReverend Wright in the first place, they may ask? Why not join another church? And I confessthat if all that I knew of Reverend Wright were the snippets of those sermons that have run inan endless loop on the television sets and YouTube, if Trinity United Church of Christconformed to the caricatures being peddled by some commentators, there is no doubt that Iwould react in much the same way. 
But the truth is, that isn't all that I know of the man. The man I met more than twenty yearsago is a man who helped introduce me to my Christian faith, a man who spoke to me aboutour obligations to love one another, to care for the sick and lift up the poor.

He is a man who served his country as a United States Marine, and who has studied andlectured at some of the finest universities and seminaries in the country, and who over 30years has led a church that serves the community by doing God's work here on Earth -- byhousing the homeless, ministering to the needy, providing day care services and scholarshipsand prison ministries, and reaching out to those suffering from HIV/AIDS.
In my first book, Dreams From My Father, I described the experience of my first service atTrinity, and it goes as follows:
People began to shout, to rise from their seats and clap and cry out, a forceful windcarrying the reverend's voice up to the rafters.
And in that single note -- hope -- I heard something else; at the foot of that cross,inside the thousands of churches across the city, I imagined the stories of ordinaryblack people merging with the stories of David and Goliath, Moses and Pharaoh, theChristians in the lion's den, Ezekiel's field of dry bones.
Those stories of survival and freedom and hope became our stories, my story. Theblood that spilled was our blood; the tears our tears; until this black church, on thisbright day, seemed once more a vessel carrying the story of a people into futuregenerations and into a larger world. Our trials and triumphs became at once uniqueand universal, black and more than black. In chronicling our journey, the stories andsongs gave us a meaning to reclaim memories that we didn't need to feel shame about-- memories that all people might study and cherish and with which we could start torebuild.
That has been my experience at Trinity. Like other predominantly black churches across thecountry, Trinity embodies the black community in its entirety -- the doctor and the welfaremom, the model student and the former gang-banger. Like other black churches, Trinity'sservices are full of raucous laughter and sometimes bawdy humor. They are full of dancingand clapping and screaming and shouting that may seem jarring to the untrained ear. Thechurch contains in full the kindness and cruelty, the fierce intelligence and the shockingignorance, the struggles and successes, the love and, yes, the bitterness and biases thatmake up the black experience in America.
And this helps explain, perhaps, my relationship with Reverend Wright. As imperfect as hemay be, he has been like family to me. He strengthens my faith, officiated my wedding, andbaptized my children. Not once in my conversations with him have I heard him talk about anyethnic group in derogatory terms or treat whites with whom he interacted with anything butcourtesy and respect. He contains within him the contradictions -- the good and the bad -- ofthe community that he has served diligently for so many years.

I can no more disown him than I can disown the black community. I can no more disown himthan I can disown my white grandmother, a woman who helped raise me, a woman whosacrificed again and again for me, a woman who loves me as much as she loves anything inthis world, but a woman who once confessed her fear of black men who passed her by on thestreet, and who on more than one occasion has uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that mademe cringe.
These people are part of me. And they are part of America, this country that I love.
Now, some will see this as an attempt to justify or excuse comments that are simplyinexcusable. I can assure you it is not. And I suppose the politically safe thing to do would beto move on from this episode and just hope that it fades into the woodwork. We can dismissReverend Wright as a crank or a demagogue, just as some have dismissed Geraldine Ferraroin the aftermath of her recent statements as harboring some deep -- deep-seated bias.
But race is an issue that I believe this nation cannot afford to ignore right now. We would bemaking the same mistake that Reverend Wright made in his offending sermons aboutAmerica: to simplify and stereotype and amplify the negative to the point that it distortsreality. The fact is that the comments that have been made and the issues that have surfacedover the last few weeks reflect the complexities of race in this country that we've never reallyworked through, a part of our union that we have not yet made perfect. And if we walk awaynow, if we simply retreat into our respective corners, we will never be able to come togetherand solve challenges like health care or education or the need to find good jobs for everyAmerican.
Understanding -- Understanding this reality requires a reminder of how we arrived at thispoint. As William Faulkner once wrote, "The past isn't dead and buried. In fact, it isn't evenpast." We do not need to recite here the history of racial injustice in this country. But we doneed to remind ourselves that so many of the disparities that exist between the African-
American community and the larger American community today can be traced directly toinequalities passed on from an earlier generation that suffered under the brutal legacy ofslavery and Jim Crow. Segregated schools were, and are, inferior schools. We still haven'tfixed them, 50 years after Brown versus Board of Education. And the inferior education theyprovided, then and now, helps explain the pervasive achievement gap between today's blackand white students.
Legalized discrimination, where blacks were prevented, often through violence, from owningproperty, or loans were not granted to African-American business owners, or blackhomeowners could not access FHA mortgages, or blacks were excluded from unions, or thepolice force, or the fire department meant that black families could not amass any meaningfulwealth to bequeath to future generations. That history helps explain the wealth and incomegap between blacks and whites and the concentrated pockets of poverty that persist in somany of today's urban and rural communities.

A lack of economic opportunity among black men and the shame and frustration that camefrom not being able to provide for one's family contributed to the erosion of black families, aproblem that welfare policies for many years may have worsened. And the lack of basicservices in so many urban black neighborhoods -- parks for kids to play in, police walking thebeat, regular garbage pick-up, building code enforcement -- all helped create a cycle ofviolence, blight, and neglect that continues to haunt us.
This is the reality in which Reverend Wright and other African-Americans of his generationgrew up. They came of age in the late '50s and early '60s, a time when segregation was stillthe law of the land and opportunity was systematically constricted. What's remarkable is nothow many failed in the face of discrimination, but how many men and women overcame theodds, how many were able to make a way out of no way for those like me who would comeafter them. 
But for all those who scratched and clawed their way to get a piece of the American Dream,there were many who didn't make it -- those who were ultimately defeated, in one way oranother, by discrimination. That legacy of defeat was passed on to future generations -- thoseyoung men and increasingly young women who we see standing on street corners orlanguishing in our prisons, without hope or prospects for the future. Even for those blacks whodid make it, questions of race, and racism, continue to define their world view in fundamentalways. For the men and women of Reverend Wright's generation, the memories of humiliationand doubt and fear have not gone away, nor has the anger and the bitterness of those years.
That anger may not get expressed in public, in front of white co-workers or white friends, butit does find voice in the barbershop or the beauty shop or around the kitchen table. At times,that anger is exploited by politicians to gin up votes along racial lines or to make up for apolitician's own failings. And occasionally it finds voice in the church on Sunday morning, inthe pulpit and in the pews. The fact that so many people are surprised to hear that anger insome of Reverend Wright's sermons simply reminds us of that old truism that the mostsegregated hour of American life occurs on Sunday morning.
That -- That anger is not always productive. Indeed, all too often it distracts attention fromsolving real problems. It keeps us from squarely facing our own complicity within the African-
American community in our own condition. It prevents the African-American community fromforging the alliances it needs to bring about real change. But the anger is real; it is powerful,and to simply wish it away, to condemn it without understanding its roots only serves towiden the chasm of misunderstanding that exists between the races.
In fact, a similar anger exists within segments of the white community. Most working andmiddle-class white Americans don't feel that they've been particularly privileged by their race.Their experience is the immigrant experience. As far as they're concerned, no one handedthem anything; they built it from scratch. They've worked hard all their lives, many times onlyto see their jobs shipped overseas or their pensions dumped after a lifetime of labor. They areanxious about their futures, and they feel their dreams slipping away.

And in an era of stagnant wages and global competition, opportunity comes to be seen as azero sum game, in which your dreams come at my expense. So when they are told to bustheir children to a school across town, when they hear that an African American is getting anadvantage in landing a good job or a spot in a good college because of an injustice that theythemselves never committed, when they're told that their fears about crime in urbanneighborhoods are somehow prejudice, resentment builds over time. 
Like the anger within the black community, these resentments aren't always expressed inpolite company. But they have helped shape the political landscape for at least a generation.Anger over welfare and affirmative action helped forge the Reagan Coalition. Politiciansroutinely exploited fears of crime for their own electoral ends. Talk show hosts andconservative commentators built entire careers unmasking bogus claims of racism whiledismissing legitimate discussions of racial injustice and inequality as mere political correctnessor reverse racism. And just as black anger often proved counterproductive, so have thesewhite resentments distracted attention from the real culprits of the middle class squeeze: acorporate culture rife with inside dealing, questionable accounting practices, and short-termgreed; a Washington dominated by lobbyists and special interests; economic policies thatfavor the few over the many. And yet, to wish away the resentments of white Americans, tolabel them as misguided or even racist without recognizing they are grounded in legitimateconcerns, this, too, widens the racial divide and blocks the path to understanding.
This is where we are right now.
It's a racial stalemate we've been stuck in for years. And contrary to the claims of some of mycritics, black and white, I have never been so naive as to believe that we can get beyond ourracial divisions in a single election cycle or with a single candidate, particularly -- particularly acandidacy as imperfect as my own. But I have asserted a firm conviction, a conviction rootedin my faith in God and my faith in the American people, that, working together, we can movebeyond some of our old racial wounds and that, in fact, we have no choice -- we have nochoice if we are to continue on the path of a more perfect union. 
For the African-American community, that path means embracing the burdens of our pastwithout becoming victims of our past. It means continuing to insist on a full measure of justicein every aspect of American life. But it also means binding our particular grievances, for betterhealth care and better schools and better jobs, to the larger aspirations of all Americans -- thewhite woman struggling to break the glass ceiling, the white man who's been laid off, theimmigrant trying to feed his family. And it means also taking full responsibility for our ownlives -- by demanding more from our fathers, and spending more time with our children, andreading to them, and teaching them that while they may face challenges and discrimination intheir own lives, they must never succumb to despair or cynicism. They must always believe --They must always believe that they can write their own destiny.

Ironically, this quintessentially American -- and, yes, conservative -- notion of self-help foundfrequent expression in Reverend Wright's sermons. But what my former pastor too often failedto understand is that embarking on a program of self-help also requires a belief that societycan change. The profound mistake of Reverend Wright's sermons is not that he spoke aboutracism in our society. It's that he spoke as if our society was static, as if no progress had beenmade, as if this country -- a country that has made it possible for one of his own members torun for the highest office in the land and build a coalition of white and black, Latino, Asian,rich, poor, young and old -- is still irrevocably bound to a tragic past. What we know, what wehave seen, is that America can change. That is true genius of this nation. What we havealready achieved gives us hope -- the audacity to hope -- for what we can and must achievetomorrow.
Now, in the white community, the path to a more perfect union means acknowledging thatwhat ails the African-American community does not just exist in the minds of black people;that the legacy of discrimination -- and current incidents of discrimination, while less overtthan in the past -- that these things are real and must be addressed. Not just with words, butwith deeds -- by investing in our schools and our communities; by enforcing our civil rightslaws and ensuring fairness in our criminal justice system; by providing this generation withladders of opportunity that were unavailable for previous generations. It requires allAmericans to realize that your dreams do not have to come at the expense of my dreams,that investing in the health, welfare, and education of black and brown and white children willultimately help all of America prosper.
In the end, then, what is called for is nothing more and nothing less than what all the world'sgreat religions demand: that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us. Let us beour brother's keeper, Scripture tells us. Let us be our sister's keeper. Let us find that commonstake we all have in one another, and let our politics reflect that spirit as well.
For we have a choice in this country. We can accept a politics that breeds division and conflictand cynicism. We can tackle race only as spectacle, as we did in the O.J. trial; or in the wakeof tragedy, as we did in the aftermath of Katrina; or as fodder for the nightly news. We canplay Reverend Wright's sermons on every channel every day and talk about them from nowuntil the election, and make the only question in this campaign whether or not the Americanpeople think that I somehow believe or sympathize with his most offensive words. We canpounce on some gaffe by a Hillary supporter as evidence that she's playing the race card; orwe can speculate on whether white men will all flock to John McCain in the general electionregardless of his policies. We can do that. But if we do, I can tell you that in the next election,we'll be talking about some other distraction, and then another one, and then another one.And nothing will change.
That is one option.

Or, at this moment, in this election, we can come together and say, "Not this time." This timewe want to talk about the crumbling schools that are stealing the future of black children andwhite children and Asian children and Hispanic children and Native-American children. Thistime we want to reject the cynicism that tells us that these kids can't learn; that those kidswho don't look like us are somebody else's problem. The children of America are not "thosekids," -- they are our kids, and we will not let them fall behind in a 21st-century economy. Notthis time. This time we want to talk about how the lines in the emergency room are filled withwhites and blacks and Hispanics who do not have health care, who don't have the power ontheir own to overcome the special interests in Washington, but who can take them on if we doit together.
This time we want to talk about the shuttered mills that once provided a decent life for menand women of every race, and the homes for sale that once belonged to Americans fromevery religion, every region, every walk of life. This time we want to talk about the fact thatthe real problem is not that someone who doesn't look like you might take your job; it's thatthe corporation you work for will ship it overseas for nothing more than a profit. This time --This time we want to talk about the men and women of every color and creed who servetogether, and fight together, and bleed together under the same proud flag. We want to talkabout how to bring them home from a war that should've never been authorized andshould've never been waged. And we want to talk about how we'll show our patriotism bycaring for them, and their families, and giving them the benefits that they have earned.
I would not be running for President if I didn't believe with all my heart that this is what thevast majority of Americans want for this country. This union may never be perfect, butgeneration after generation has shown that it can always be perfected. And today, whenever Ifind myself feeling doubtful or cynical about this possibility, what gives me the most hope isthe next generation -- the young people whose attitudes and beliefs and openness to changehave already made history in this election.
There's one story in particular that I'd like to leave you with today, a story I told when I hadthe great honor of speaking on Dr. King's birthday at his home church, Ebenezer Baptist, inAtlanta. There's a young, 23-year-old woman, a white woman named Ashley Baia, whoorganized for our campaign in Florence, South Carolina. She'd been working to organize amostly African-American community since the beginning of this campaign, and one day shewas at a roundtable discussion where everyone went around telling their story and why theywere there. And Ashley said that when she was 9 years old, her mother got cancer. Andbecause she had to miss days of work, she was let go and lost her health care. They had tofile for bankruptcy, and that's when Ashley decided that she had to do something to help hermom. 
She knew that food was one of their most expensive costs, and so Ashley convinced hermother that what she really liked and really wanted to eat more than anything else wasmustard and relish sandwiches -- because that was the cheapest way to eat. That's the mindof a 9 year old.

She did this for a year until her mom got better. And so Ashley told everyone at theroundtable that the reason she had joined our campaign was so that she could help themillions of other children in the country who want and need to help their parents too. 
Now, Ashley might have made a different choice. Perhaps somebody told her along the waythat the source of her mother's problems were blacks who were on welfare and too lazy towork, or Hispanics who were coming into the country illegally. But she didn't. She sought outallies in her fight against injustice. 
Anyway, Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks everyone else whythey're supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and different reasons. Manybring up a specific issue. And finally they come to this elderly black man who's been sittingthere quietly the entire time. And Ashley asks him why he's there. And he doesn't bring up aspecific issue. He does not say health care or the economy. He does not say education or thewar. He does not say that he was there because of Barack Obama. He simply says toeveryone in the room, "I am here because of Ashley." "I'm here because of Ashley." 
Now, by itself, that single moment of recognition between that young white girl and that oldblack man is not enough. It is not enough to give health care to the sick, or jobs to thejobless, or education to our children. But it is where we start. It is where our union growsstronger. And as so many generations have come to realize over the course of the 221 yearssince a band of patriots signed that document right here in Philadelphia, that is whereperfection begins. 
Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you. 