To Vicki, Ted, Patrick, Curran, Caroline, Ambassador Smith, members of the Kennedy family --thank you so much for inviting me to speak today.  Your Eminence, Cardinal O’Malley; VicePresident Biden; Governor Baker; Mayor Walsh; members of Congress, past and present; andpretty much every elected official in Massachusetts -- it is an honor to mark this occasion withyou.
Boston, know that Michelle and I have joined our prayers with yours these past few days for ahero -- former Army Ranger and Boston Police Officer John Moynihan, who was shot in the lineof duty on Friday night.  I mention him because, last year, at the White House, the VicePresident and I had the chance to honor Officer Moynihan as one of America’s “Top Cops” forhis bravery in the line of duty, for risking his life to save a fellow officer.  And thanks to theheroes at Boston Medical Center, I’m told Officer Moynihan is awake, and talking, and we wishhim a full and speedy recovery. I also want to single out someone who very much wanted to be here, just as he was everyday for nearly 25 years as he represented this commonwealth alongside Ted in the Senate --and that's Secretary of State John Kerry.  As many of you know, John is in Europe with ourallies and partners, leading the negotiations with Iran and the world community, and standingup for a principle that Ted and his brother, President Kennedy, believed in so strongly:  “Letus never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear to negotiate.”
  
And, finally, in his first years in the Senate, Ted dispatched a young aide to assemble a teamof talent without rival.  The sell was simple:  Come and help Ted Kennedy make history.  So Iwant to give a special shout-out to his extraordinarily loyal staff -- 50 years later a familymore than one thousand strong.  This is your day, as well.  We're proud of you.  Of course,many of you now work with me.  So enjoy today, because we got to get back to work.
Distinguished guests, fellow citizens -- in 1958, Ted Kennedy was a young man working toreelect his brother, Jack, to the United States Senate.  On election night, the two toasted oneanother:  “Here’s to 1960, Mr. President,” Ted said, “If you can make it.”  With his quick Irishwit, Jack returned the toast:  “Here’s to 1962, Senator Kennedy, if you can make it.”  Theyboth made it.  And today, they’re together again in eternal rest at Arlington. 
But their legacies are as alive as ever together right here in Boston.  The John F. KennedyLibrary next door is a symbol of our American idealism; the Edward M. Kennedy Institute forthe United States Senate as a living example of the hard, frustrating, never-ending, butcritical work required to make that idealism real. What more fitting tribute, what better testament to the life of Ted Kennedy, than this placethat he left for a new generation of Americans -- a monument not to himself but to what we,the people, have the power to do together. Any of us who have had the privilege to serve in the Senate know that it’s impossible not toshare Ted’s awe for the history swirling around you -- an awe instilled in him by his brother,Jack.  Ted waited more than a year to deliver his first speech on the Senate floor.  That's nolonger the custom.  It's good to see Trent and Tom Daschle here, because they rememberwhat customs were like back then.
And Ted gave a speech only because he felt there was a topic -- the Civil Rights Act -- thatdemanded it.  Nevertheless, he spoke with humility, aware, as he put it, that “a freshmanSenator should be seen, not heard; should learn, and not teach.” Some of us, I admit, have not always heeded that lesson.  But fortunately, we had Ted toshow us the ropes anyway.  And no one made the Senate come alive like Ted Kennedy.  Itwas one of the great pleasures of my life to hear Ted Kennedy deliver one of his stem winderson the Floor.  Rarely was he more animated than when he’d lead you through the livingmuseums that were his offices.  He could -- and he would -- tell you everything that there wasto know about all of it.
And then there were more somber moments.  I still remember the first time I pulled open thedrawer of my desk.  Each senator is assigned a desk, and there’s a tradition of carving thenames of those who had used it before.  And those names in my desk included Taft andBaker, Simon, Wellstone, and Robert F. Kennedy. 
  
The Senate was a place where you instinctively pulled yourself up a little bit straighter; whereyou tried to act a little bit better.  “Being a senator changes a person,” Ted wrote in hismemoirs.  As Vicki said, it may take a year, or two years, or three years, but it alwayshappens; it fills you with a heightened sense of purpose. That’s the magic of the Senate.  That’s the essence of what it can be.  And who but TedKennedy, and his family, would create a full-scale replica of the Senate chamber, and open itto everyone? 
We live in a time of such great cynicism about all our institutions.  And we are cynical aboutgovernment and about Washington, most of all.  It’s hard for our children to see, in the noisyand too often trivial pursuits of today’s politics, the possibilities of our democracy -- ourcapacity, together, to do big things.
And this place can help change that.  It can help light the fire of imagination, plant the seed ofnoble ambition in the minds of future generations.  Imagine a gaggle of school kids clutchingtablets, turning classrooms into cloakrooms and hallways into hearing rooms, assigned anissue of the day and the responsibility to solve it. Imagine their moral universe expanding as they hear about the momentous battles waged inthat chamber and how they echo throughout today’s society.  Great questions of war andpeace, the tangled bargains between North and South, federal and state; the original sins ofslavery and prejudice; and the unfinished battles for civil rights and opportunity and equality. Imagine the shift in their sense of what’s possible.  The first time they see a video of senatorswho look like they do -- men and women, blacks and whites, Latinos, Asian-Americans; thoseborn to great wealth but also those born of incredibly modest means. Imagine what a child feels the first time she steps onto that floor, before she’s old enough tobe cynical; before she’s told what she can’t do; before she’s told who she can’t talk to or workwith; what she feels when she sits at one of those desks; what happens when it comes herturn to stand and speak on behalf of something she cares about; and cast a vote, and have asense of purpose. It’s maybe just not for kids.  What if we all carried ourselves that way?  What if our politics,our democracy, were as elevated, as purposeful, as she imagines it to be right here? Towards the end of his life, Ted reflected on how Congress has changed over time.  And thosewho served earlier I think have those same conversations.  It’s a more diverse, more accuratereflection of America than it used to be, and that is a grand thing, a great achievement.  ButTed grieved the loss of camaraderie and collegiality, the face-to-face interaction.  I think heregretted the arguments now made to cameras instead of colleagues, directed at a narrowbase instead of the body politic as a whole; the outsized influence of money and specialinterests -- and how it all leads more Americans to turn away in disgust and simply choose notto exercise their right to vote.
  
 Now, since this is a joyous occasion, this is not the time for me to suggest a slew of new ideasfor reform.  Although I do have some.  Maybe I’ll just mention one. 
What if we carried ourselves more like Ted Kennedy?  What if we worked to follow hisexample a little bit harder?  To his harshest critics, who saw him as nothing more than apartisan lightning rod -- that may sound foolish, but there are Republicans here today for areason.  They know who Ted Kennedy was.  It’s not because they shared Ted’s ideology or hispositions, but because they knew Ted as somebody who bridged the partisan divide over andover and over again, with genuine effort and affection, in an era when bipartisanship hasbecome so very rare. 
They knew him as somebody who kept his word.  They knew him as somebody who waswilling to take half a loaf and endure the anger of his own supporters to get something done. They knew him as somebody who was not afraid.  And fear so permeates our politics, insteadof hope.  People fight to get in the Senate and then they’re afraid.  We fight to get thesepositions and then don’t want to do anything with them.  And Ted understood the only point ofrunning for office was to get something done -- not to posture; not to sit there worrying aboutthe next election or the polls -- to take risks.  He understood that differences of party orphilosophy could not become barriers to cooperation or respect. He could howl at injustice on the Senate floor like a force of nature, while nervous aides triedto figure out which chart to pull up next.  But in his personal dealings, he answered EdmundRandolph’s call to keep the Senate a place to “restrain, if possible, the fury of democracy.” I did not know Ted as long as some of the speakers here today.  But he was my friend.  I owehim a lot.  And as far as I could tell, it was never ideology that compelled him, except insofaras his ideology said, you should help people; that you should have a life of purpose; that youshould be empathetic and be able to put yourself in somebody else’s shoes, and see throughtheir eyes.  His tirelessness, his restlessness, they were rooted in his experience.
By the age of 12, he was a member of a Gold Star Family.  By 36, two of his brothers werestolen from him in the most tragic, public of ways.  By 41, he nearly lost a beloved child tocancer.  And that made suffering something he knew.  And it made him more alive to thesuffering of others.  While his son was sleeping after treatment, Ted would wander the halls of the hospital andmeet other parents keeping vigil over their own children.  They were parents terrified of whatwould happen when they couldn’t afford the next treatment; parents working out what theycould sell or borrow or mortgage just to make it just a few more months -- and then, if theyhad to, bargain with God for the rest. 
  
There, in the quiet night, working people of modest means and one of the most powerful menin the world shared the same intimate, immediate sense of helplessness.  He didn't see themas some abstraction.  He knew them.  He felt them.  Their pain was his as much as they mightbe separated by wealth and fame.  And those families would be at the heart of Ted’spassions.  Just like the young immigrant, he would see himself in that child.  They were hiscause -- the sick child who couldn’t see a doctor; the young soldier sent to battle withoutarmor; the citizen denied her rights because of what she looked like or where she came fromor who she loves.
He quietly attended as many military funerals in Massachusetts as he could for those who fellin Iraq and Afghanistan.  He called and wrote each one of the 177 families in thiscommonwealth who lost a loved one on 9/11, and he took them sailing, and played with theirchildren, not just in the days after, but every year after. His life’s work was not to champion those with wealth or power or connections; they alreadyhad enough representation.  It was to give voice to the people who wrote and called him fromevery state, desperate for somebody who might listen and help.  It was about what he coulddo for others. It’s why he’d take his hearings to hospitals in rural towns and inner cities, and push peopleout of their comfort zones, including his colleagues.  Because he had pushed himself out of hiscomfort zone.  And he tried to instill in his colleagues that same sense of empathy.  Even ifthey called him, as one did, “wrong at the top of his lungs.”  Even if they might disagree withhim 99 percent of the time.  Because who knew what might happen with that other 1 percent? Orrin Hatch was sent to Washington in part because he promised to fight Ted Kennedy.  Andthey fought a lot.  One was a conservative Mormon from Utah, after all; the other one was,well, Ted Kennedy.  But once they got to know one another, they discovered certain things incommon -- a devout faith, a soft spot for health care, very fine singing voices.
In 1986, when Republicans controlled the Senate, Orrin held the first hearing on the AIDSepidemic, even hugging an AIDS patient -- an incredible and very important gesture at thetime.  The next year, Ted took over the committee, and continued what Orrin started.  WhenOrrin’s father passed away, Ted was one of the first to call.  It was over dinner at Ted’s houseone night that they decided to try and insure the 10 million children who didn’t have access tohealth care. As that debate hit roadblocks in Congress, as apparently debates over health care tend to do,Ted would have his Chief of Staff serenade Orrin to court his support.  When hearings didn’tgo Ted’s way, he might puff on a cigar to annoy Orrin, who disdained smoking.  When theydidn’t go Orrin’s way, he might threaten to call Ted’s sister, Eunice.  And when it came time tofind a way to pay for the Children’s Health Insurance Program that they, together, haddevised, Ted pounced, offering a tobacco tax and asking, “Are you for Joe Camel and theMarlboro Man, or millions of children who lack adequate health care?” 
  
It was the kind of friendship unique to the Senate, calling to mind what John Calhoun oncesaid of Henry Clay:  “I don’t like Clay.  He is a bad man, an imposter, a creator of wickedschemes.  I wouldn’t speak to him, but, by God, I love him!”
So, sure, Orrin Hatch once called Ted “one of the major dangers to the country.”  But he alsostood up at a gathering in Ted’s last months, and said, “I’m asking you all to pray for TedKennedy.” The point is, we can fight on almost everything.  But we can come together on some things. And those “somethings” can mean everything to a whole lot of people. 
It was common ground that led Ted and Orrin to forge a compromise that covered millions ofkids with health care.  It was common ground, rooted in the plight of loved ones, that led Tedand Chuck Grassley to cover kids with disabilities; that led Ted and Pete Domenici to fight forequal rights for Americans with a mental illness.
Common ground, not rooted in abstractions or stubborn, rigid ideologies, but sharedexperience, that led Ted and John McCain to work on a Patient’s Bill of Rights, and to work toforge a smarter, more just immigration system. A common desire to fix what’s broken.  A willingness to compromise in pursuit of a largergoal.  A personal relationship that lets you fight like heck on one issue, and shake hands onthe next -- not through just cajoling or horse-trading or serenades, but through Ted’s brand offriendship and kindness, and humor and grace.  “What binds us together across our differences in religion or politics or economic theory,” Tedwrote in his memoirs, “[is] all we share as human beings -- the wonder that we experiencewhen we look at the night sky; the gratitude that we know when we feel the heat of the sun;the sense of humor in the face of the unbearable; and the persistence of suffering.  And onething more -- the capacity to reach across our differences to offer a hand of healing.” For all the challenges of a changing world, for all the imperfections of our democracy, thecapacity to reach across our differences is something that’s entirely up to us. May we all, in our own lives, set an example for the kids who enter these doors, and exit withhigher expectations for their country. 
May we all remember the times this American family has challenged us to ask what we cando; to dream and say why not; to seek a cause that endures; and sail against the wind in itspursuit, and live our lives with that heightened sense of purpose. Thank you.  May God bless you.  May He continue to bless this country we love.  Thank you.
