Good morning President Taylor, Board of Trustees, faculty, parents, family, friends, thecommunity of Galesburg, the class of 1955 -- which I understand was out partying last night,and yet still showed up here on time -- and most of all, the Class of 2005. Congratulations onyour graduation, and thank you -- thank you for the honor of allowing me to be a part of it.Thank you also, Mr. President, for this honorary degree. It was only a couple of years ago thatI stopped paying my student loans in law school. Had I known it was this easy, I would haveran [sic] for the United States Senate earlier.
You know, it has been about six months now since you sent me to Washington as your UnitedStates Senator. I recognize that not all of you voted for me, so for those of you mutteringunder your breath "I didn’t send you anywhere," that's ok too. Maybe we’ll hold -- What doyou call it? -- a little Pumphandle after the ceremony. Change your mind for the next time.
It has been a fascinating journey thus far. Each time I walk onto the Senate floor, I'mreminded of the history, for good and for ill, that has been made there. But there have been afew surreal moments.

For example, I remember the day before I was sworn in, myself and my staff, we decided tohold a press conference in our office. Now, keep in mind that I am ranked 99th in seniority. Iwas proud that I wasn’t ranked dead last until I found out that it’s just because Illinois isbigger than Colorado. So I’m 99th in seniority, and all the reporters are crammed into the tinytransition office that I have, which is right next to the janitor’s closet in the basement of theDirksen Office Building. It’s my first day in the building, I have not taken a single vote, I havenot introduced one bill, had not even sat down in my desk, and this very earnest reporterraises his hand and says:
“Senator Obama, what is your place in history?”
I did what you just did, which is laugh out loud. I said, "place in history?" I thought he waskidding. At that point, I wasn’t even sure the other Senators would save a place for me at thecool kids’ table.
But as I was thinking about the words to share with this class, about what’s next, aboutwhat’s possible, and what opportunities lay ahead, I actually think it’s not a bad question foryou, the class of 2005, to ask yourselves: What will be your place in history?
In other eras, across distant lands, this question could be answered with relative ease andcertainty. As a servant in Rome, you knew you’d spend your life forced to build somebodyelse’s Empire. As a peasant in 11th Century China, you knew that no matter how hard youworked, the local warlord might come and take everything you had -- and you also knew thatfamine might come knocking at the door. As a subject of King George, you knew that yourfreedom of worship and your freedom to speak and to build your own life would be ultimatelylimited by the throne.
And then America happened.
A place where destiny was not a destination, but a journey to be shared and shaped andremade by people who had the gall, the temerity to believe that, against all odds, they couldform “a more perfect union” on this new frontier.
And as people around the world began to hear the tale of the lowly colonists who overthrewan empire for the sake of an idea, they started to come. Across oceans and the ages, theysettled in Boston and Charleston, Chicago and St. Louis, Kalamazoo and Galesburg, to try andbuild their own American Dream. This collective dream moved forward imperfectly -- it wasscarred by our treatment of native peoples, betrayed by slavery, clouded by the subjugationof women, shaken by war and depression. And yet, brick by brick, rail by rail, calloused handby calloused hand, people kept dreaming, and building, and working, and marching, andpetitioning their government, until they made America a land where the question of our placein history is not answered for us. It’s answered by us.

Have we failed at times? Absolutely. Will you occasionally fail when you embark on your ownAmerican journey? You surely will. But the test is not perfection.The true test of the American ideal is whether we’re able to recognize our failings and thenrise together to meet the challenges of our time. Whether we allow ourselves to be shaped byevents and history, or whether we act to shape them. Whether chance of birth orcircumstance decides life’s big winners and losers, or whether we build a community where, atthe very least, everyone has a chance to work hard, get ahead, and reach their dreams.
We have faced this choice before.
At the end of the Civil War, when farmers and their families began moving into the cities towork in the big factories that were sprouting up all across America, we had to decide:  Do wedo nothing and allow captains of industry and robber barons to run roughshod over theeconomy and workers by competing to see who can pay the lowest wages at the worstworking conditions? Or do we try to make the system work by setting up basic rules for themarket, instituting the first public schools, busting up monopolies, letting workers organizeinto unions?
We chose to act, and we rose together.
When the irrational exuberance of the Roaring Twenties came crashing down with the stockmarket, we had to decide: do we follow the call of leaders who would do nothing, or the call ofa leader who, perhaps because of his physical paralysis, refused to accept political paralysis?
We chose to act -- regulating the market, putting people back to work, expanding bargainingrights to include health care and a secure retirement -- and together we rose.
When World War II required the most massive home front mobilization in history and weneeded every single American to lend a hand, we had to decide: Do we listen to skeptics whotold us it wasn’t possible to produce that many tanks and planes? Or, did we build Roosevelt’sArsenal for Democracy and grow our economy even further by providing our returning heroeswith a chance to go to college and own their own home?
Again, we chose to act, and again, we rose together.
Today, at the beginning of this young century, we have to decide again. But this time, it isyour turn to choose.
Here in Galesburg, you know what this new challenge is. You’ve seen it. All of you, your firstyear in college saw what happened at 9/11. It’s already been noted, the degree to which yourlives will be intertwined with the war on terrorism that currently is taking place. But whatyou’ve also seen, perhaps not as spectacularly, is the fact that when you drive by the oldMaytag plant around lunchtime, no one walks out anymore.

I saw it during the campaign when I met union guys who worked at the plant for 20, 30 yearsand now wonder what they’re gonna do at the age of 55 without a pension or health care;when I met the man who’s son needed a new liver but because he’d been laid off, didn’t knowif he could afford to provide his child the care that he needed.
It’s as if someone changed the rules in the middle of the game and no wonder -- no onebothered to tell these folks. And, in reality, the rules have changed.
It started with technology and automation that rendered entire occupations obsolete. Whenwas the last time anybody here stood in line for the bank teller instead of going to the ATM, ortalked to a switchboard operator? Then it continued when companies like Maytag were able topick up and move their factories to some under developed country where workers were a lotcheaper than they are in the United States.
As Tom Friedman points out in his new book, The World Is Flat, over the last decade or so,these forces -- technology and globalization -- have combined like never before. So that whilemost of us have been paying attention to how much easier technology has made our own lives-- sending e-mails back and forth on our blackberries, surfing the Web on our cell phones,instant messaging with friends across the world -- a quiet revolution has been breaking downbarriers and connecting the world’s economies. Now business not only has the ability to movejobs wherever there’s a factory, but wherever there’s an internet connection.
Countries like India and China realized this. They understand that they no longer need to bejust a source of cheap labor or cheap exports. They can compete with us on a global scale.The one resource they needed were skilled, educated workers. So they started schooling theirkids earlier, longer, with a greater emphasis on math and science and technology, until theirmost talented students realized they don’t have to come to America to have a decent life --they can stay right where they are.
The result? China is graduating four times the number of engineers that the United States isgraduating. Not only are those Maytag employees competing with Chinese and Indian andIndonesian and Mexican workers, you are too. Today, accounting firms are e-mailing your taxreturns to workers in India who will figure them out and send them back to you as fast as anyworker in Illinois or Indiana could.
When you lose your luggage in Boston at an airport, tracking it down may involve a call to anagent in Bangalore, who will find it by making a phone call to Baltimore. Even the AssociatedPress has outsourced some of their jobs to writers all over the world who can send in a storyat a click of a mouse.
As Prime Minister Tony Blair has said, in this new economy, "Talent is the 21st centurywealth."  If you've got the skills, you've got the education, and you have the opportunity toupgrade and improve both, you’ll be able to compete and win anywhere. If not, the fall will befurther and harder than it ever was before.

So what do we do about this? How does America find its way in this new, globaleconomy? What will our place in history be?
Like so much of the American story, once again, we face a choice. Once again, there are thosewho believe that there isn’t much we can do about this as a nation. That the best idea is togive everyone one big refund on their government -- divvy it up by individual portions, in theform of tax breaks, hand it out, and encourage everyone to use their share to go buy theirown health care, their own retirement plan, their own child care, their own education, and soon.
In Washington, they call this the Ownership Society. But in our past there has been anotherterm for it -- Social Darwinism -- every man or woman for him or herself. It’s a tempting idea,because it doesn’t require much thought or ingenuity. It allows us to say that those whosehealth care or tuition may rise faster than they can afford -- tough luck. It allows us to say tothe Maytag workers who have lost their job -- life isn’t fair. It let’s us say to the child who wasborn into poverty -- pull yourself up by your bootstraps. And it is especially tempting becauseeach of us believes we will always be the winner in life’s lottery, that we’re the one who will bethe next Donald Trump, or at least we won’t be the chump who Donald Trump says: “You’refired!”
But there is a problem. It won’t work. It ignores our history. It ignores the fact that it’s beengovernment research and investment that made the railways possible and the internetpossible. It’s been the creation of a massive middle class, through decent wages and benefitsand public schools that allowed us all to prosper. Our economic dependence depended onindividual initiative. It depended on a belief in the free market; but it has also depended onour sense of mutual regard for each other, the idea that everybody has a stake in the country,that we’re all in it together and everybody’s got a shot at opportunity. That’s what’s producedour unrivaled political stability.
And so if we do nothing in the face of globalization, more people will continue to lose theirhealth care. Fewer kids will be able to afford the diploma you’re about to receive.
More companies like United Airlines won’t be able to provide pensions for their employees.And those Maytag workers will be joined in the unemployment line by any worker whose skillscan be bought and sold on the global market.
So today I’m here to tell you what most of you already know. This is not us -- the option thatI just mentioned. Doing nothing. It’s not how our story ends -- not in this country. America isa land of big dreamers and big hopes.
It is this hope that has sustained us through revolution and civil war, depression and worldwar, a struggle for civil and social rights and the brink of nuclear crisis. And it is because ourdreamers dreamed that we have emerged from each challenge more united, more prosperous,and more admired than before.

So let’s dream. Instead of doing nothing or simply defending 20th century solutions, let’simagine together what we could do to give every American a fighting chance in the 21stcentury.
What if we prepared every child in America with the education and skills they need to competein the new economy?  If we made sure that college was affordable for everyone who wantedto go? If we walked up to those Maytag workers and we said “Your old job is not coming back,but a new job will be there because we’re going to seriously retrain you and there’s life-longeducation that’s waiting for you -- the sorts of opportunities that Knox has created with theStrong Futures scholarship program.
What if no matter where you worked or how many times you switched jobs, you had healthcare and a pension that stayed with you always, so you all had the flexibility to move to abetter job or start a new business? What if instead of cutting budgets for research anddevelopment and science, we fueled the genius and the innovation that will lead to the newjobs and new industries of the future?
Right now, all across America, there are amazing discoveries being made. If we supportedthese discoveries on a national level, if we committed ourselves to investing in thesepossibilities, just imagine what it could do for a town like Galesburg. Ten or twenty yearsdown the road, that old Maytag plant could re-open its doors as an Ethanol refinery thatturned corn into fuel. Down the street, a biotechnology research lab could open up on thecusp of discovering a cure for cancer. And across the way, a new auto company could be busychurning out electric cars. The new jobs created would be filled by American workers trainedwith new skills and a world-class education.
All of that is possible but none of it will come easy. Every one of us is going to have to workmore, read more, train more, think more. We will have to slough off some bad habits -- likedriving gas guzzlers that weaken our economy and feed our enemies abroad. Our children willhave to turn off the TV set once in a while and put away the video games and start hitting thebooks. We’ll have to reform institutions, like our public schools, that were designed for anearlier time. Republicans will have to recognize our collective responsibilities, even asDemocrats recognize that we have to do more than just defend old programs.
It won’t be easy, but it can be done. It can be our future. We have the talent and theresources and brainpower. But now we need the political will. We need a nationalcommitment.
And we need each of you.
Now, no one can force you to meet these challenges. If you want, it will be pretty easy for youto leave here today and not give another thought to towns like Galesburg and the challengesthey face. There is no community service requirement in the real world; no one is forcing youto care.

You can take your diploma, walk off this stage, and go chasing after the big house, and thenice suits, and all the other things that our money culture says that you should want, that youshould aspire to, that you can buy.
But I hope you don’t walk away from the challenge. Focusing your life solely on making a buckshows a certain poverty of ambition. It asks too little of yourself. You need to take up thechallenges that we face as a nation and make them your own. Not because you have a debt tothose who helped you get here, although you do have that debt. Not because you have anobligation to those who are less fortunate than you, although I do think you do have thatobligation. It’s primarily because you have an obligation to yourself. Because individualsalvation has always depended on collective salvation. Because it’s only when you hitch yourwagon to something larger than yourself that you realize your true potential.
And I know that all of you are wondering how you’ll do this, the challenges seem so big. Theyseem so difficult for one person to make a difference.
But we know it can be done. Because where you’re sitting, in this very place, in this town, it’shappened before.
Nearly two centuries ago, before civil rights, before voting rights, before Abraham Lincoln,before the Civil War, before all of that, America was stained by the sin of slavery. In thesweltering heat of southern plantations, men and women who looked like me could not escapethe life of pain and servitude in which they were sold. And yet, year after year, as this moralcancer ate away at the American ideals of liberty and equality, the nation was silent.
But its people didn’t stay silent for long.
One by one, abolitionists emerged to tell their fellow Americans that this would not be ourplace in history -- that this was not the America that had captured the imagination of theworld.
This resistance that they met was fierce, and some paid with their lives. But they would not bedeterred, and they soon spread out across the country to fight for their cause. One man fromNew York went west, all the way to the prairies of Illinois to start a colony.
And here in Galesburg, freedom found a home.
Here in Galesburg, the main depot for the Underground Railroad in Illinois, escaped slavescould roam freely on the streets and take shelter in people’s homes. And when their mastersor the police would come for them, the people of this town would help them escape north,some literally carrying them in their arms to freedom.

Think about the risks that involved. If they were caught abetting a fugitive, you could’ve beenjailed or lynched. It would have been simple for these townspeople to turn the other way; togo live their lives in a private peace.
And yet, they didn’t do that. Why?
Because they knew that we were all Americans; that we were all brothers and sisters; thesame reason that a century later, young men and women your age would take Freedom Ridesdown south, to work for the Civil Rights movement. The same reason that black women wouldwalk instead of ride a bus after a long day of doing somebody else’s laundry and cleaningsomebody else’s kitchen. Because they were marching for freedom.
Today, on this day of possibility, we stand in the shadow of a lanky, raw-boned man with littleformal education who once took the stage at Old Main and told the nation that if anyone didnot believe the American principles of freedom and equality, that those principles weretimeless and all-inclusive, they should go rip that page out of the Declaration ofIndependence.
My hope for all of you is that as you leave here today, you decide to keep these principlesalive in your own life and in the life of this country. You will be tested. You won’t alwayssucceed. But know that you have it within your power to try. That generations who have comebefore you faced these same fears and uncertainties in their own time. And that through ourcollective labor, and through God’s providence, and our willingness to shoulder each other’sburdens, America will continue on its precious journey towards that distant horizon, and abetter day.
Thank you so much class of 2005, and congratulations on your graduation. Thank you.