Good afternoon, everybody.  One year ago this month, senators of both parties –- withsupport from the business, labor, law enforcement, faith communities –- came together topass a commonsense immigration bill. 
Independent experts said that bill would strengthen our borders, grow our economy, shrinkour deficits.  As we speak, there are enough Republicans and Democrats in the House to passan immigration bill today.  I would sign it into law today, and Washington would solve aproblem in a bipartisan way.
But for more than a year, Republicans in the House of Representatives have refused to allowan up-or-down vote on that Senate bill or any legislation to fix our broken immigrationsystem.  And I held off on pressuring them for a long time to give Speaker Boehner the spacehe needed to get his fellow Republicans on board. 
Meanwhile, here’s what a year of obstruction has meant.  It has meant fewer resources tostrengthen our borders.  It’s meant more businesses free to game the system by hiringundocumented workers, which punishes businesses that play by the rules, and drives downwages for hardworking Americans.  It’s meant lost talent when the best and brightest fromaround the world come to study here but are forced to leave and then compete against ourbusinesses and our workers.  It’s meant no chance for 11 million immigrants to come out ofthe shadows and earn their citizenship if they pay a penalty and pass a background check,pay their fair share of taxes, learn English, and go to the back of the line.  It’s meant theheartbreak of separated families. 
  
That’s what this obstruction has meant over the past year.  That’s what the Senate bill wouldfix if the House allowed it to go to a vote.
Our country and our economy would be stronger today if House Republicans had allowed asimple yes-or-no vote on this bill or, for that matter, any bill.  They’d be following the will ofthe majority of the American people who support reform.  Instead, they’ve proven again andagain that they’re unwilling to stand up to the tea party in order to do what’s best for thecountry.  And the worst part about it is a bunch of them know better.
We now have an actual humanitarian crisis on the border that only underscores the need todrop the politics and fix our immigration system once and for all.  In recent weeks, we’ve seena surge of unaccompanied children arrive at the border, brought here and to other countriesby smugglers and traffickers. 
The journey is unbelievably dangerous for these kids.  The children who are fortunate enoughto survive it will be taken care of while they go through the legal process, but in most casesthat process will lead to them being sent back home.  I’ve sent a clear message to parents inthese countries not to put their kids through this.  I recently sent Vice President Biden to meetwith Central American leaders and find ways to address the root causes of this crisis. Secretary Kerry will also be meeting with those leaders again tomorrow.  With ourinternational partners, we’re taking new steps to go after the dangerous smugglers who areputting thousands of children’s lives at risk.
Today, I sent a letter to congressional leaders asking that they work with me to address theurgent humanitarian challenge on the border, and support the immigration and Border Patrolagents who already apprehend and deport hundreds of thousands of undocumentedimmigrants every year.  And understand, by the way, for the most part, this is not a situationwhere these children are slipping through.  They’re being apprehended.  But the problem is, isthat our system is so broken, so unclear that folks don’t know what the rules are.
Now, understand –- there are a number of Republicans who have been willing to work with usto pass real, commonsense immigration reform, and I want to thank them for their efforts. There are a number of Republican leaders in the Senate who did excellent work and deserveour thanks.  And less visibly, there have been folks in the House who have been trying towork to get this done.  And quietly, because it doesn’t always help me to praise them, I’veexpressed to them how much I appreciate the efforts that they’ve made.
I believe Speaker Boehner when he says he wants to pass an immigration bill.  I think hegenuinely wants to get something done.  But last week, he informed me that Republicans willcontinue to block a vote on immigration reform at least for the remainder of this year.  Somein the House Republican Caucus are using the situation with unaccompanied children as theirnewest excuse to do nothing.  Now, I want everybody to think about that.  Their argumentseems to be that because the system is broken, we shouldn’t make an effort to fix it.  Itmakes no sense.  It’s not on the level.  It’s just politics, plain and simple. 
  
Now, there are others in the Republican Caucus in the House who are arguing that they can’tact because they’re mad at me about using my executive authority too broadly.  This alsomakes no sense.  I don’t prefer taking administrative action.  I’d rather see permanent fixesto the issue we face.  Certainly that’s true on immigration.  I’ve made that clear multipletimes.  I would love nothing more than bipartisan legislation to pass the House, the Senate,land on my desk so I can sign it.  That’s true about immigration, that’s true about theminimum wage, it’s true about equal pay.  There are a whole bunch of things where I wouldgreatly prefer Congress actually do something.  I take executive action only when we have aserious problem, a serious issue, and Congress chooses to do nothing.  And in this situation,the failure of House Republicans to pass a darn bill is bad for our security, it’s bad for oureconomy, and it’s bad for our future. 
So while I will continue to push House Republicans to drop the excuses and act –- and I hopetheir constituents will too -– America cannot wait forever for them to act.  And that’s why,today, I’m beginning a new effort to fix as much of our immigration system as I can on myown, without Congress.  As a first step, I’m directing the Secretary of Homeland Security andthe Attorney General to move available and appropriate resources from our interior to theborder.  Protecting public safety and deporting dangerous criminals has been and will remainthe top priority, but we are going to refocus our efforts where we can to make sure we dowhat it takes to keep our border secure. 
I have also directed Secretary Johnson and Attorney General Holder to identify additionalactions my administration can take on our own, within my existing legal authorities, to dowhat Congress refuses to do and fix as much of our immigration system as we can.  IfCongress will not do their job, at least we can do ours.  I expect their recommendationsbefore the end of summer and I intend to adopt those recommendations without furtherdelay. 
Of course, even with aggressive steps on my part, administrative action alone will notadequately address the problem.  The reforms that will do the most to strengthen ourbusinesses, our workers, and our entire economy will still require an act of Congress.  And Irepeat:  These are reforms that already enjoy the wide support of the American people.  It’svery rare where you get labor, business, evangelicals, law enforcement all agreeing on whatneeds to be done.  And at some point, that should be enough.  Normally, that is enough.  Thepoint of public service is to solve public problems.  And those of us who have the privilege toserve have a responsibility to do everything in our power to keep Americans safe and to keepthe doors of opportunity open. 
And if we do, then one year from now, not only would our economy and our security bestronger, but maybe the best and the brightest from around the world who come study herewould stay and create jobs here.  Maybe companies that play by the rules will no longer beundercut by companies that don’t.
  
Maybe more families who’ve been living here for years, whose children are often U.S. citizens,who are our neighbors and our friends, whose children are our kids’ friends and go to schoolwith them, and play on ball teams with them, maybe those families would get to staytogether.  But much of this only happens if Americans continue to push Congress to get thisdone.
So I’ve told Speaker Boehner that even as I take those steps that I can within my existinglegal authorities to make the immigration system work better, I’m going to continue to reachout to House Republicans in the hope that they deliver a more permanent solution with acomprehensive bill.  Maybe it will be after the midterms, when they’re less worried aboutpolitics.  Maybe it will be next year.  Whenever it is, they will find me a willing partner.  I havebeen consistent in saying that I am prepared to work with them even on a bill that I don'tconsider perfect.  And the Senate bill was a good example of the capacity to compromise andget this done.  The only thing I can’t do is stand by and do nothing while waiting for them toget their act together. 
And I want to repeat what I said earlier.  If House Republicans are really concerned about metaking too many executive actions, the best solution to that is passing bills.  Pass a bill; solvea problem.  Don't just say no on something that everybody agrees needs to be done.  Becauseif we pass a bill, that will supplant whatever I’ve done administratively.  We’ll have a structurethere that works, and it will be permanent.  And people can make plans and businesses canmake plans based on the law.  And there will be clarity both here inside this country andoutside it.
Let me just close by saying Friday is the Fourth of July.  It’s the day we celebrate ourindependence and all the things that make this country so great.  And each year, Michelle andI host a few hundred service members and wounded warriors and their families right here onthe lawn for a barbecue and fireworks on the Mall.
And some of the service members coming this year are unique because they signed up toserve, to sacrifice, potentially to give their lives for the security of this country even thoughthey weren’t yet Americans.  That's how much they love this country.  They were prepared tofight and die for an America they did not yet fully belong to.  I think they’ve earned theirstripes in more ways than one.  And that’s why on Friday morning we’re going to naturalizethem in a ceremony right here at the White House.  This Independence Day will be their firstday as American citizens. 
One of the things we celebrate on Friday –- one of the things that make this country great –-is that we are a nation of immigrants.  Our people come from every corner of the globe. That's what makes us special.  That's what makes us unique.  And throughout our history,we’ve come here in wave after wave from everywhere understanding that there wassomething about this place where the whole was greater than the sum of its parts; that all thedifferent cultures and ideas and energy would come together and create something new.
  
We won this country’s freedom together.  We built this country together.  We defended thiscountry together.  It makes us special.  It makes us strong.  It makes us Americans.  That’sworth celebrating.  And that's what I want not just House Republicans but all of us asAmericans to remember.
Thanks very much.
