Please, everybody have a seat. Thank you for the wonderful introduction, David. And thankyou for the great work that you are doing each and every day. And I appreciate such a warmwelcome. Some of you I've gotten a chance to know; many of you I'm meeting for the firsttime. But the spirit of the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, the desire to create jobs andprovide opportunity to people who sometimes have been left out -- that's exactly what thisadministration is about. That's the essence of the American Dream. And so I'm very proud tohave a chance to speak with all of you.
You know, every so often, throughout our history, a generation of Americans bears theresponsibility of seeing this country through difficult times and protecting the dream of itsfounding for posterity. This is a responsibility that's fallen to our generation. Meeting it willrequire steering our nation's economy through a crisis unlike anything that we have seen inour time. 
In the short term, that means jump-starting job creation and restarting lending, and restoringconfidence in our markets and our financial system. But it also means taking steps that notonly advance our recovery, but lay the foundation for lasting, shared prosperity.

I know there's some who believe we can only handle one challenge at a time. And they forgetthat Lincoln helped lay down the transcontinental railroad and passed the Homestead Act andcreated the National Academy of Sciences in the midst of civil war. Likewise, PresidentRoosevelt didn't have the luxury of choosing between ending a depression and fighting a war;he had to do both. President Kennedy didn't have the luxury of choosing between civil rightsand sending us to the moon. And we don't have the luxury of choosing between getting oureconomy moving now and rebuilding it over the long term.
America will not remain true to its highest ideals -- and America's place as a global economicleader will be put at risk -- unless we not only bring down the crushing cost of health care andtransform the way we use energy, but also if we do -- if we don't do a far better job thanwe've been doing of educating our sons and daughters; unless we give them the knowledgeand skills they need in this new and changing world.
For we know that economic progress and educational achievement have always gone hand inhand in America. The land-grant colleges and public high schools transformed the economy ofan industrializing nation. The GI Bill generated a middle class that made America's economyunrivaled in the 20th century. Investments in math and science under President Eisenhowergave new opportunities to young scientists and engineers all across the country. It madepossible somebody like a Sergei Brin to attend graduate school and found an upstart companycalled Google that would forever change our world.
The source of America's prosperity has never been merely how ably we accumulate wealth,but how well we educate our people. This has never been more true than it is today. In a21st-century world where jobs can be shipped wherever there's an Internet connection, wherea child born in Dallas is now competing with a child in New Delhi, where your best jobqualification is not what you do, but what you know -- education is no longer just a pathwayto opportunity and success, it's a prerequisite for success. 
That's why workers without a four-year degree have borne the brunt of recent layoffs, Latinosmost of all. That's why, of the 30 fastest growing occupations in America, half require aBachelor's degree or more. By 2016, four out of every 10 new jobs will require at least someadvanced education or training. 
So let there be no doubt: The future belongs to the nation that best educates its citizens --and my fellow Americans, we have everything we need to be that nation. We have the bestuniversities, the most renowned scholars. We have innovative principals and passionateteachers and gifted students, and we have parents whose only priority is their child'seducation. We have a legacy of excellence, and an unwavering belief that our children shouldclimb higher than we did.

And yet, despite resources that are unmatched anywhere in the world, we've let our gradesslip, our schools crumble, our teacher quality fall short, and other nations outpace us. Let megive you a few statistics. In 8th grade math, we've fallen to 9th place. Singapore's middle-
schoolers outperform ours three to one. Just a third of our 13- and 14-year-olds can read aswell as they should. And year after year, a stubborn gap persists between how well whitestudents are doing compared to their African American and Latino classmates. The relativedecline of American education is untenable for our economy, it's unsustainable for ourdemocracy, it's unacceptable for our children -- and we can't afford to let it continue.
What's at stake is nothing less than the American Dream. It's what drew my father and somany of your fathers and mothers to our shores in pursuit of an education. It's what led LindaBrown and Gonzalo and Felicitas Mendez to bear the standard of all who were attendingseparate and unequal schools. It's what has led generations of Americans to take on thatextra job, to sacrifice the small pleasures, to scrimp and save wherever they can, in hopes ofputting away enough, just enough, to give their child the education that they never had. It'sthat most American of ideas, that with the right education, a child of any race, any faith, anystation, can overcome whatever barriers stand in their way and fulfill their God-givenpotential.
Of course, we've heard all this year after year after year after year -- and far too little haschanged. Certainly it hasn't changed in too many overcrowded Latino schools; it hasn'tchanged in too many inner-city schools that are seeing dropout rates of over 50 percent. It'snot changing not because we're lacking sound ideas or sensible plans -- in pockets ofexcellence across this country, we're seeing what children from all walks of life can and willachieve when we set high standards, have high expectations, when we do a good job ofpreparing them. Instead, it's because politics and ideology have too often trumped ourprogress that we're in the situation that we're in. 
For decades, Washington has been trapped in the same stale debates that have paralyzedprogress and perpetuated our educational decline. Too many supporters of my party haveresisted the idea of rewarding excellence in teaching with extra pay, even though we know itcan make a difference in the classroom. Too many in the Republican Party have opposed newinvestments in early education, despite compelling evidence of its importance. So what we gethere in Washington is the same old debate about it's more money versus more reform,vouchers versus the status quo. There's been partisanship and petty bickering, but littlerecognition that we need to move beyond the worn fights of the 20th century if we're going tosucceed in the 21st century.
I think you'd all agree that the time for finger-pointing is over. The time for holding us --holding ourselves accountable is here. What's required is not simply new investments, butnew reforms. It's time to expect more from our students. It's time to start rewarding goodteachers, stop making excuses for bad ones. It's time to demand results from government atevery level. It's time to prepare every child, everywhere in America, to out-compete anyworker, anywhere in the world. It's time to give all Americans a complete and competitive education from the cradle up through a career. We've accepted failure for far too long. Enoughis enough. America's entire education system must once more be the envy of the world -- andthat's exactly what we intend to do.
That's exactly what the budget I'm submitting to Congress has begun to achieve. Now, at atime when we've inherited a trillion-dollar deficit, we will start by doing a little housekeeping,going through our books, cutting wasteful education programs. My outstanding Secretary ofEducation, Arne Duncan, who's here today -- stand up, Arne, so everybody can see you. I'massuming you also saw my Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis. But Secretary Duncan will use onlyone test when deciding what ideas to support with your precious tax dollars: It's not whetheran idea is liberal or conservative, but whether it works. And this will help free up resources forthe first pillar of reforming our schools -- investing in early childhood initiatives.
This isn't just about keeping an eye on our children, it's about educating them. Studies showthat children in early childhood education programs are more likely to score higher in readingand math, more likely to graduate from high school and attend college, more likely to hold ajob, and more likely to earn more in that job. For every dollar we invest in these programs,we get nearly $10 back in reduced welfare rolls, fewer health care costs, and less crime.That's why the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act that I signed into law invests $5billion in growing Early Head Start and Head Start, expanding access to quality child care for150,000 more children from working families, and doing more for children with special needs.And that's why we are going to offer 55,000 first-time parents regular visits from trainednurses to help make sure their children are healthy and prepare them for school and for life.
Even as we invest in early childhood education, let's raise the bar for early learning programsthat are falling short. Now, today, some children are enrolled in excellent programs. Somechildren are enrolled in mediocre programs. And some are wasting away their most formativeyears in bad programs. That includes the one-fourth of all children who are Hispanic, and whowill drive America's workforce of tomorrow, but who are less likely to have been enrolled in anearly childhood education program than anyone else.
That's why I'm issuing a challenge to our states: Develop a cutting-edge plan to raise thequality of your early learning programs; show us how you'll work to ensure that children arebetter prepared for success by the time they enter kindergarten. If you do, we will supportyou with an Early Learning Challenge Grant that I call on Congress to enact. That's how wewill reward quality and incentivize excellence, and make a down payment on the success ofthe next generation.
So that's the first pillar of our education reform agenda. The second, we will end what hasbecome a race to the bottom in our schools and instead spur a race to the top by encouragingbetter standards and assessments. Now, this is an area where we are being outpaced by othernations. It's not that their kids are any smarter than ours -- it's that they are being smarterabout how to educate their children.

They're spending less time teaching things that don't matter, and more time teaching thingsthat do. They're preparing their students not only for high school or college, but for a career.We are not. Our curriculum for 8th graders is two full years behind top performing countries.That's a prescription for economic decline. And I refuse to accept that America's childrencannot rise to this challenge. They can, and they must, and they will meet higher standards inour time. 
So let's challenge our states -- let's challenge our states to adopt world-class standards thatwill bring our curriculums to the 21st century. Today's system of 50 different sets ofbenchmarks for academic success means 4th grade readers in Mississippi are scoring nearly70 points lower than students in Wyoming -- and they're getting the same grade. Eight of ourstates are setting their standards so low that their students may end up on par with roughlythe bottom 40 percent of the world.
That's inexcusable. That's why I'm calling on states that are setting their standards far belowwhere they ought to be to stop low-balling expectations for our kids. The solution to low testscores is not lowering standards -- it's tougher, clearer standards.  Standards like those inMassachusetts, where 8th graders are -- we have a Massachusetts contingent here. InMassachusetts, 8th graders are now tying for first -- first in the whole world in science. Otherforward-thinking states are moving in the same direction by coming together as part of aconsortium. And more states need to do the same. And I'm calling on our nation's governorsand state education chiefs to develop standards and assessments that don't simply measurewhether students can fill in a bubble on a test, but whether they possess 21st century skillslike problem-solving and critical thinking and entrepreneurship and creativity. 
That is what we'll help them do later this year -- that what we're going to help them do laterthis year when we finally make No Child Left Behind live up to its name by ensuring not onlythat teachers and principals get the funding that they need, but that the money is tied toresults.  And Arne Duncan will also back up this commitment to higher standards with a fundto invest in innovation in our school districts.
Of course, raising standards alone will not make much of a difference unless we provideteachers and principals with the information they need to make sure students are prepared tomeet those standards. And far too few states have data systems like the one in Florida thatkeep track of a student's education from childhood through college. And far too few districtsare emulating the example of Houston and Long Beach, and using data to track how muchprogress a student is making and where that student is struggling. That's a resource that canhelp us improve student achievement, and tell us which students had which teachers so wecan assess what's working and what's not. That's why we're making a major investment inthis area that we will cultivate a new culture of accountability in America's schools.

Now, to complete our race to the top requires the third pillar of reform -- recruiting,preparing, and rewarding outstanding teachers. From the moment students enter a school,the most important factor in their success is not the color of their skin or the income of theirparents, it's the person standing at the front of the classroom. That's why our Recovery Actwill ensure that hundreds of thousands of teachers and school personnel are not laid off --because those Americans are not only doing jobs they can't afford to lose, they're rendering aservice our nation cannot afford to lose, either. 
America's future depends on its teachers. And so today, I'm calling on a new generation ofAmericans to step forward and serve our country in our classrooms. If you want to make adifference in the life of our nation, if you want to make the most of your talents anddedication, if you want to make your mark with a legacy that will endure -- then join theteaching profession. America needs you. We need you in our suburbs. We need you in oursmall towns. We especially need you in our inner cities. We need you in classrooms all acrossour country.
And if you do your part, then we'll do ours. That's why we're taking steps to prepare teachersfor their difficult responsibilities, and encourage them to stay in the profession. That's whywe're creating new pathways to teaching and new incentives to bring teachers to schoolswhere they're needed most. That's why we support offering extra pay to Americans who teachmath and science to end a teacher shortage in those subjects. It's why we're building on thepromising work being done in places like South Carolina's Teachers Advancement Program,and making an unprecedented commitment to ensure that anyone entrusted with educatingour children is doing the job as well as it can be done. 
Now, here's what that commitment means: It means treating teachers like the professionalsthey are while also holding them more accountable -– in up to 150 more school districts. Newteachers will be mentored by experienced ones. Good teachers will be rewarded with moremoney for improved student achievement, and asked to accept more responsibilities for liftingup their schools. Teachers throughout a school will benefit from guidance and support to helpthem improve. 
And just as we've given our teachers all the support they need to be successful, we need tomake sure our students have the teacher they need to be successful. And that means statesand school districts taking steps to move bad teachers out of the classroom. But let me beclear -- Let me be clear -- the overwhelming number of teachers are doing an outstanding jobunder difficult circumstances. My sister is a teacher, so I know how tough teaching can be.But let me be clear: If a teacher is given a chance or two chances or three chances but stilldoes not improve, there's no excuse for that person to continue teaching. I reject a systemthat rewards failure and protects a person from its consequences. The stakes are too high. Wecan afford nothing but the best when it comes to our children's teachers and the schoolswhere they teach.

Now, that leads me to the fourth part of America's education strategy –- promoting innovationand excellence in America's schools. One of the places where much of that innovation occursis in our most effective charter schools. And these are public schools founded by parents,teachers, and civic or community organizations with broad leeway to innovate -– schools Isupported as a state legislator and a United States senator. 
But right now, there are many caps on how many charter schools are allowed in some states,no matter how well they're preparing our students. That isn't good for our children, oureconomy, or our country. Of course, any expansion of charter schools must not result in thespread of mediocrity, but in the advancement of excellence. And that will require statesadopting both a rigorous selection and review process to ensure that a charter school'sautonomy is coupled with greater accountability –- as well as a strategy, like the one inChicago, to close charter schools that are not working. Provided this greater accountability, Icall on states to reform their charter rules, and lift caps on the number of allowable charterschools, wherever such caps are in place.
Now, even as we foster innovation in where our children are learning, let's also fosterinnovation in when our children are learning. We can no longer afford an academic calendardesigned for when America was a nation of farmers who needed their children at homeplowing the land at the end of each day. That calendar may have once made sense, but todayit puts us at a competitive disadvantage. Our children -- listen to this -- our children spendover a month less in school than children in South Korea -- every year. That's no way toprepare them for a 21st century economy. That's why I'm calling for us not only to expandeffective after-school programs, but to rethink the school day to incorporate more time -–whether during the summer or through expanded-day programs for children who need it.
Now, I know longer school days and school years are not wildly popular ideas.  Not with Maliaand Sasha -- not in my family, and probably not in yours. But the challenges of a new centurydemand more time in the classroom. If they can do that in South Korea, we can do it righthere in the United States of America.
Of course, no matter how innovative our schools or how effective our teachers, Americacannot succeed unless our students take responsibility for their own education. That meansshowing up for school on time, paying attention in class, seeking out extra tutoring if it'sneeded, staying out of trouble. To any student who's watching, I say this: Don't even thinkabout dropping out of school. Don't even think about it. 
As I said a couple of weeks ago, dropping out is quitting on yourself, it's quitting on yourcountry, and it's not an option -- not anymore. Not when our high school dropout rate hastripled in the past 30 years. Not when high school dropouts earn about half as much ascollege graduates. Not when Latino students are dropping out faster than just about anyoneelse. It's time for all of us, no matter what our backgrounds, to come together and solve thisepidemic.

Stemming the tide of dropouts will require turning around our low-performing schools. Just2,000 high schools in cities like Detroit and Los Angeles and Philadelphia produce over 50percent of America's dropouts. And yet there are too few proven strategies to transform theseschools. And there are too few partners to get the job done. 
So today, I'm issuing a challenge to educators and lawmakers, parents and teachers alike: Letus all make turning around our schools our collective responsibility as Americans. And that willrequire new investments in innovative ideas -- that's why my budget invests in developingnew strategies to make sure at-risk students don't give up on their education; new efforts togive dropouts who want to return to school the help they need to graduate; and new ways toput those young men and women who have left school back on a pathway to graduation. 
Now, the fifth part of America's education strategy is providing every American with a qualityhigher education -– whether it's college or technical training. Never has a college degree beenmore important. Never has it been more expensive. And at a time when so many of ourfamilies are bearing enormous economic burdens, the rising cost of tuition threatens toshatter dreams. And that's why we will simplify federal college assistance forms so it doesn'ttake a Ph.D to apply for financial aid. 
That's why we're already taking steps to make college or technical training affordable. For thefirst time ever, Pell Grants will not be subject to the politics of the moment or the whim of themarket –- they will be a commitment that Congress is required to uphold each and everyyear. Not only that; because rising costs mean Pell Grants cover less than half as much tuitionas they did 30 years ago, we're raising the maximum Pell Grant to $5,550 a year and indexingit above inflation. We're also providing a $2,500-a-year tuition tax credit for students fromworking families. And we're modernizing and expanding the Perkins Loan Program to makesure schools like UNLV don't get a tenth as many Perkins loans as schools like Harvard. 
To help pay for all of this, we're putting students ahead of lenders by eliminating wastefulstudent loan subsidies that cost taxpayers billions each year. All in all, we are making collegeaffordable for 7 million more students with a sweeping investment in our children's futuresand America's success. And I call on Congress to join me and the American people by makingthese investments possible. 
This is how we will help meet our responsibility as a nation to open the doors of college toevery American. But it will also be the responsibility of colleges and universities to controlspiraling costs. We can't just keep on putting more money in and universities and colleges notdoing their part to hold down tuitions. And it's the responsibility of our students to walkthrough the doors of opportunity. 
In just a single generation, America has fallen from 2nd place to 11th place in the portion ofstudents completing college. That is unfortunate, but it's by no means irreversible. Withresolve and the right investments, we can retake the lead once more.

And that's why, in my address to the nation the other week, I called on Americans to committo at least one year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having thehighest proportion of college graduates in the world by the year 2020. And to meet that goal,we are investing $2.5 billion to identify and support innovative initiatives across the countrythat achieve results in helping students persist and graduate.
So let's not stop at education with college. Let's recognize a 21st century reality: Learningdoesn't end in our early 20s. Adults of all ages need opportunities to earn new degrees andnew skills -- especially in the current economic environment. That means working with all ouruniversities and schools, including community colleges -- a great and undervalued asset -- toprepare workers for good jobs in high-growth industries; and to improve access to job trainingnot only for young people who are just starting their careers, but for older workers who neednew skills to change careers. And that's going to be one of the key tasks that Secretary Solisis involved with, is making sure that lifelong learning is a reality and a possibility for moreAmericans.
It's through initiatives like these that we'll see more Americans earn a college degree, orreceive advanced training, and pursue a successful career. And that's why I'm calling onCongress to work with me to enact these essential reforms, and to reauthorize the WorkforceReinvestment Act. That's how we will round out a complete and competitive education in theUnited States of America.
So here's the bottom line: Yes, we need more money; yes, we need more reform; yes, weneed to hold ourselves more accountable for every dollar we spend. But there's one moreingredient I want to talk about. No government policy will make any difference unless we alsohold ourselves more accountable as parents -- because government, no matter how wise orefficient, cannot turn off the TV or put away the video games. Teachers, no matter howdedicated or effective, cannot make sure your child leaves for school on time and does theirhomework when they get back at night. These are things only a parent can do. These arethings that our parents must do.
I say this not only as a father, but also as a son. When I was a child my mother and I livedoverseas, and she didn't have the money to send me to the fancy international school whereall the American kids went to school. So what she did was she supplemented my schoolingwith lessons from a correspondence course. And I can still picture her waking me up at 4:30a.m., five days a week, to go over some lessons before I went to school. And whenever I'dcomplain and grumble and find some excuse and say, "Awww, I'm sleepy," she'd patientlyrepeat to me her most powerful defense. She'd say, "This is no picnic for me either, buster."
And when you're a kid you don't think about the sacrifices they're making. She had to work; Ijust had to go to school. But she'd still wake up every day to make sure I was getting what Ineeded for my education.

And it's because she did this day after day, week after week, because of all the otheropportunities and breaks that I got along the way, all the sacrifices that my grandmother andmy grandfather made along the way, that I can stand here today as President of the UnitedStates. It's because of the sacrifices -- See, I want every child in this country to have thesame chance that my mother gave me, that my teachers gave me, that my college professorsgave me, that America gave me.
You know these stories; you've lived them, as well. All of you have a similar story to tell. Youknow, it's -- I want children like Yvonne Bojorquez to have that chance. Yvonne is a student atVillage Academy High School in California. Now, Village Academy is a 21st century schoolwhere cutting edge technologies are used in the classroom, where college prep and careertraining are offered to all who seek it, and where the motto is "respect, responsibility, andresults."
Now, a couple of months ago, Yvonne and her class made a video talking about the impactthat our struggling economy was having on their lives. And some of them spoke about theirparents being laid off, or their homes facing foreclosure, or their inability to focus on schoolwith everything that was happening at home. And when it was her turn to speak, Yvonnesaid: "We've all been affected by this economic crisis. [We] are all college bound students;we're all businessmen, and doctors and lawyers and all this great stuff. And we have all thispotential -- but the way things are going, we're not going to be able to [fulfill it]."
It was heartbreaking that a girl so full of promise was so full of worry that she and her classtitled their video, "Is anybody listening?" So, today, there's something I want to say toYvonne and her class at Village Academy: I am listening. We are listening. America islistening. And we will not rest until your parents can keep your jobs -- we will not rest untilyour parents can keep their jobs and your families can keep their homes, and you can focuson what you should be focusing on -- your own education; until you can become thebusinessmen, doctors, and lawyers of tomorrow, until you can reach out and grasp yourdreams for the future.
For in the end, Yvonne's dream is a dream shared by all Americans. It's the founding promiseof our nation: That we can make of our lives what we will; that all things are possible for allpeople; and that here in America, our best days lie ahead. I believe that. I truly believe if I domy part, and you, the American people, do yours, then we will emerge from this crisis astronger nation, and pass the dream of our founding on to posterity, ever safer than before.
Thank you very much. God bless you. God bless the United States of America. 
Thank you.