Good evening, everybody.  I want to begin by thanking the people of Washington, D.C. forhosting us, especially for putting up with more than 50 motorcades.  And I will make onepromise to the people of this city -- I will not hold another one of these summits in another sixyears.
I want to thank everyone who participated in our meetings -- more than 50 leaders fromevery region of the world and key international organizations.  As at our previous summits, wedidn’t just come here to talk, but we came here to act.  I know that the very technical natureof nuclear security doesn’t always make for flashy headlines.  But over the past six years, wehave made significant, meaningful progress in securing the world’s nuclear material so that itnever falls into the hands of terrorists.  And I want to take a few moments to step back andlay out exactly what we have accomplished.
Together, we have removed the world’s most deadly materials from nuclear facilities aroundthe world.  With Japan’s announcement today, we’ve now removed or secured all the highlyenriched uranium and plutonium from more than 50 facilities in 30 countries -- more than 3.8tons, which is more than enough to create 150 nuclear weapons.  That's material than willnever fall into the hands of terrorists.
  
Fourteen nations and Taiwan -- countries as diverse as Argentina and Chile, to Libya andTurkey, to Serbia and Vietnam  -- have now rid themselves entirely of highly enricheduranium and plutonium.  In particular, I want to point out again that successfully removing allof Ukraine’s highly enriched uranium four years ago meant that the very difficult situation inUkraine over the past two years was not made even more dangerous by the presence of thesematerials.
As of today, South America -- an entire continent -- is completely free of these dangerousmaterials.  When Poland completes its removal this year, central Europe will be free of themas well.  When Indonesia completes its work this year, so will all of Southeast Asia.  In otherwords, as terrorists and criminal gangs and arms merchants look around for deadlyingredients for a nuclear device, vast regions of the world are now off-limits.  And that is aremarkable achievement.
We’ve made important progress in the United States as well. In addition to the new steps Iannounced this morning, we’ve improved nuclear security and training.  We’ve consolidatednuclear materials at fewer facilities, eliminated some 138 tons of our surplus highly enricheduranium -- which would be enough for 5,500 nuclear weapons.  Working with Russia, we’re ontrack to eliminate enough Russian highly enriched uranium for about 20,000 nuclear weapons,which we are converting to electricity here in the United States.
More specifically, as a result of these summits, every single one of the more than 50 nationsrepresented here have taken concrete steps to enhance security at their nuclear facilities andstorage sites.  And that includes improved physical security, stronger regulations, abiding byinternational guidelines, greater transparency, and that includes international peer reviews. Fifteen new centers have been created around the world to promote nuclear securitytechnologies and training, to share best practices.  And as part of our work today, we agreedto keep strengthening our nuclear facilities’ defenses against cyber-attacks.
We’ve bolstered international efforts to disrupt nuclear smuggling.  The Proliferation SecurityInitiative has grown to more than 100 nations, including regular exercises to improve ourcollective ability to interdict shipments.  The United States and 36 partner countries haveworked to install radiation detection equipment at more than 300 international bordercrossings, airports and ports.  And we are developing new mobile detection systems as well. And finally, as I noted this morning, we’ve strengthened the treaties and internationalpartnerships that are a foundation for so many of our efforts.
So, again, we have made significant progress.  And everyone involved in this work --especially our teams, who have worked tirelessly for years -- can take enormous pride in ourachievements.  Nevertheless, as I said earlier, our work is by no means finished.  There’s stilla great deal of nuclear and radioactive material around the world that needs to be secured. Global stocks of plutonium are growing.
  
Nuclear arsenals are expanding in some countries with more small, tactical nuclear weapons,which could be at greater risk of theft.  And as a consequence, one of the central goals of thissummit was how do we build on the work that has been done so that we have an internationalarchitecture that can continue the efforts, even though this is the last formal leaders’ summit.
So even as this is the last of those leader-level summits, today we agreed to maintain astrong architecture, including through the United Nations, the International Atomic EnergyAgency, and INTERPOL, to carry on this work and to provide the resources and technicalsupport that is needed to continue this mission.  And we are creating a new nuclear securitycontact group -- senior-level experts from more than 30 of our countries -- who will meetregularly to preserve the networks of cooperation we’ve built, to institutionalize this work, andto keep driving progress for years to come.
At our session on ISIL this afternoon, there was widespread agreement that defeating terroristgroups like ISIL requires more information-sharing.  Everybody understands the urgency inthe wake of what’s happened in Brussels and Turkey, Pakistan, and so many other countriesaround the world.  As a consequence, our Director of National Intelligence, Jim Clapper, iscontinuing to engage with intelligence leaders from a number of our European partners ondeepening our cooperation.  And today, I invited all the nations represented at this summit tojoin a broader discussion among our intelligence and security services on how we can improveinformation-sharing within and among our nations to prevent all manner of terrorist attacks,especially those that might involve weapons of mass destruction.
In closing, I just want to say that preventing nuclear terrorism is one part of the broaderagenda that I outlined seven years ago in Prague -- stopping the spread of nuclear weaponsand seeking a world without them.  In recent days, there’s been no shortage of analysis onwhether we’ve achieved our vision, and I’m the first to acknowledge the great deal of workthat remains -- from negotiating further reductions with Russia to dealing with North Korea’snuclear program. 
As I indicated in Prague, realizing our vision will not happen quickly, and it perhaps will nothappen in my lifetime.  But we’ve begun.  The United States and Russian nuclear arsenals areon track to be the lowest that they have been in six decades. I’ve reduced the number androle of nuclear weapons in our nuclear security strategy.  In a historic deal, we’ve preventedthe spread of nuclear weapons to Iran.  An international fuel bank is being built to promotecivil nuclear cooperation.
So I’m extremely proud of our record across the board.  And we’re going to keep pushingforward wherever we can, as I hope future administrations do, to bring us closer to the daywhen these nuclear dangers no longer hang over the heads of our children and ourgrandchildren.
  
 
With that, let me take a few questions.  And I’m going to start with Roberta Rampton ofReuters.
Question:  Thank you.  I want to ask about Iran.  And three weeks ago, Iran’s SupremeLeader complained that his country has not been getting actual business deals since thenuclear agreement.  And non-U.S. companies are saying that it’s very hard, or sometimesimpossible, to do much business with Iran without at some point accessing the U.S. financialsystem to do U.S.-dollar-denominated transactions.  So my question is, are you consideringallowing such transactions?  And if so, is that not a betrayal of your assurances that most U.S.sanctions would stay in place?
President Obama:  That’s not actually the approach that we’re taking.  So let me saybroadly that so long as Iran is carrying out its end of the bargain, we think it’s important forthe world community to carry out our end of the bargain.
They have, in fact, based on the presentations that were made by the IAEA this morning tothe P5+1, have, in fact, followed the implementation steps that were laid out.  And as aconsequence, sanctions related to their nuclear program have been brought down.  Part of thechallenge that they face is that companies haven’t been doing business there for a long time,and they need to get comfortable with the prospects of this deal holding.
One of the things that Secretary Lew and his counterparts within the P5+1 and elsewhere aregoing to be doing is providing clarity to businesses about what transactions are, in fact,allowed.  And it’s going to take time over the next several months for companies and theirlegal departments to feel confident that, in fact, there may not be risks of liability if they dobusiness with Iran.
And so some of the concerns that Iran has expressed we are going to work with them toaddress.  It is not necessary that we take the approach of them going through dollar-
denominated transactions.  It is possible for them to work through European financialinstitutions, as well.  But there is going to need to be continued clarification provided tobusinesses in order to -- for deal flows to begin.
Now, what I would say is also important is Iran’s own behavior in generating confidence thatIran is a safe place to do business.  In a deal like this, my first priority, my first concern wasmaking sure that we got their nuclear program stopped, and material that they already hadthat would give them a very short breakout capacity, that that was shipped out.  That hashappened.  And I always said that I could not promise that Iran would take advantage of thisopportunity and this window to reenter the international community.
  
Iran, so far, has followed the letter of the agreement.  But the spirit of the agreement involvesIran also sending signals to the world community and businesses that it is not going to beengaging in a range of provocative actions that might scare business off.  When they launchedballistic missiles with slogans calling for the destruction of Israel that makes businessesnervous.  There is some geopolitical risk that is heightened when they see that taking place.
If Iran continues to ship missiles to Hezbollah, that gets businesses nervous.  And so part ofwhat I hope happens is we have a responsibility to provide clarity about the rules that governso that Iran can, in fact, benefit, the Iranian people can benefit from an improved economicsituation.  But Iran has to understand what every country in the world understands, which isbusinesses want to go where they feel safe, where they don't see massive controversy, wherethey can be confident that transactions are going to operate normally.  And that's anadjustment that Iran is going to have to make as well.
And, frankly, within Iran, I suspect there are different views.  In the same way that there arehardliners here in the United States who, even after we certify that this deal is working, evenafter our intelligence teams, Israeli intelligence teams say this has been a game-changer, arestill opposed to the deal on principle, there are hardliners inside of Iran who don't want to seeIran open itself up to the broader world community and are doing things to potentiallyundermine the deal.
And so those forces that seek the benefits of the deal not just in narrow terms but morebroadly, we want to make sure that, over time, they're in a position to realize those benefits.
David Nakamura.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  As you mentioned at the beginning of your remarks,you just finished a working session with 50 world leaders about combatting terrorism andgroups like the Islamic State.  And I wanted to ask you specifically about one of thestrategies, prime strategies your administration is using in that effort.  In the past severalweeks, your administration has killed well over 200 people in airstrikes in Somalia, Libya, andYemen, according to the Department of Defense.  How can you be certain that all the peoplekilled posed an imminent threat to the United States?  And why is the United States nowkilling scores of people at a time, rather than eliminating individuals in very targeted strikes? Thank you.
President Obama:  We have constructed a fairly rigid and vigorous set of criteria for usevaluating the intelligence that we receive about ISIL, where it might be operating, where alQaeda is operating.  These guidelines involve a whole range of agencies consultingextensively, and are then checked, double-checked, triple-checked before kinetic actions aretaken. 
  
And for the most part, our actions are directed at high-value targets in the countries that youjust described, outside of the theater of Iraq and Syria.  In some cases, what we're seeing arecamps that after long periods of monitoring becomes clear are involved in in directing plotsthat could do the United States harm, or are supporting ISIL activities or al Qaeda activitieselsewhere in the world. 
So, if after a long period of observation, we are seeing that, in fact, explosive materials arebeing loaded onto trucks, and individuals are engaging in training in small arms, and there aresome of those individuals who are identified as couriers for ISIL or al Qaeda then, based onthose evaluations, a strike will be taken.  But what we have been very cautious about ismaking sure that we are not taking strikes in situations where, for example, we think there isthe presence of women or children, or if it is in a normally populated area. 
And recently we laid out the criteria by which we're making these decisions.  We declassifiedmany elements of this.  We are going to be putting forward and trying to institutionalize on aregular basis how we make these evaluations and these analyses. 
I think, in terms of the broader debate that's taking place, David, I think there’s been in thepast legitimate criticism that the architecture, the legal architecture around the use of dronestrikes or other kinetic strikes wasn't as precise as it should have been, and there's no doubtthat civilians were killed that shouldn't have been.  I think that over the last several years, wehave worked very hard to avoid and prevent those kinds of tragedies from taking place. 
In situations of war, we have to take responsibility when we're not acting appropriately, orwhere we've just made mistakes even with the best of intentions.  And that's what we'regoing to continue to try to do.  And what I can say with great confidence is that our operatingprocedures are as rigorous as they have ever been and that there is a constant evaluation ofprecisely what we do.
Carol Lee.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You've spent seven years now working onnonproliferation issues, and you said in your opening remarks that you hope that futureadministrations do the same and make it a priority.  This week, the Republican frontrunner toreplace you said that perhaps South Korea and Japan should have nuclear weapons, andwouldn't rule out using nuclear weapons in Europe.  Did that come up at this summit?  Andjust generally, what message does it send when a major-party candidate is articulating such areversal in U.S. foreign policy?  And also, who did you vote for in the Democratic primary?  
President Obama:  Well, first of all, it's a secret ballot, isn't it, Carol?  Okay.  No, I'm notgoing to tell you now.
  
What do the statements you mentioned tell us?  They tell us that the person who made thestatements doesn't know much about foreign policy, or nuclear policy, or the KoreanPeninsula, or the world generally.
It came up on the sidelines.  I’ve said before that people pay attention to American elections. What we do is really important to the rest of the world.  And even in those countries that areused to a carnival atmosphere in their own politics want sobriety and clarity when it comes toU.S. elections because they understand the President of the United States needs to knowwhat’s going on around the world and has to put in place the kinds of policies that lead notonly to our security and prosperity, but will have an impact on everybody else’s security andprosperity.
Our alliance with Japan and the Republic of Korea is one of the foundations, one of thecornerstones of our presence in the Asia Pacific region.  It has underwritten the peace andprosperity of that region.  It has been an enormous buoy to American commerce and Americainfluence.  And it has prevented the possibilities of a nuclear escalation and conflict betweencountries that, in the past and throughout history, have been engaged in hugely destructiveconflicts and controversies.
So you don't mess with that.  It is an investment that rests on the sacrifices that our men andwomen made back in World War II when they were fighting throughout the Pacific.  It isbecause of their sacrifices and the wisdom that American foreign policymakers showed afterWorld War II that we’ve been able to avoid catastrophe in those regions.  And we don't wantsomebody in the Oval Office who doesn't recognize how important that is.
Andrew Beatty.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Yesterday you met with President Erdogan of Turkeyhours after some fairly ugly scenes at the Brookings Institution.  I was wondering, do youconsider him an authoritarian?
President Obama:  Turkey is a NATO ally.  It is an extraordinarily important partner in ourfight against ISIL.  It is a country with whom we have a long and strategic relationship with. And President Erdogan is someone who I’ve dealt with since I came into office, and in a wholerange of areas, we’ve had a productive partnership.
What is also true, and I have expressed this to him directly, so it’s no secret that there aresome trends within Turkey that I’ve been troubled with.  I am a strong believer in freedom ofthe press.  I'm a strong believer in freedom of religion.  I'm a strong believer in rule of lawand democracy.  And there is no doubt that President Erdogan has repeatedly been electedthrough a democratic process, but I think the approach that they've been taking towards thepress is one that could lead Turkey down a path that would be very troubling. 
  
And we are going to continue to advise them -- and I've said to President Erdogan, remindhim that he came into office with a promise of democracy.  And Turkey has historically been acountry in which deep Islamic faith has lived side by side with modernity and an increasingopenness.  And that's the legacy that he should pursue, rather than a strategy that involvesrepression of information and shutting down democratic debate.
Having said that, I want to emphasize the degree to which their cooperation has been criticalon a whole range of international and regional issues, and will continue to be.  And so as istrue with a lot of our friends and partners, we work with them, we cooperate with them.  Weare appreciative of their efforts.  And there are going to be some differences.  And wherethere are differences, we will say so.  And that's what I've tried to do here.
I'll take one last question.  This young lady right there.
Question:   Thank you, President.  Mr. President, what do you think --
President Obama:  Where are you from, by the way?
Question:   I am from Azerbaijan.  How can Azerbaijan support in nuclear security issue?
President Obama:  Well, Azerbaijan, like many countries that participated, have alreadytaken a number of steps.  And each country has put forward a national action plan.  There aresome countries that had stockpiles of highly enriched uranium that they agreed to get rid of. There are other countries that have civilian nuclear facilities but don’t necessarily have thebest security practices, and so they have adopted better security practices.
There are countries that could potentially be transit points for the smuggling of nuclearmaterials, and so they've worked with us on border controls and detection.  And because ofAzerbaijan's location, it's a critical partner in this process.
I should point out, by the way, that although the focus of these summits has been on securingnuclear materials and making sure they don’t fall into the hands of terrorists, therelationships, the information-sharing, the stitching together of domestic law enforcement,international law enforcement, intelligence, military agencies, both within countries andbetween countries -- this set of relationships internationally will be useful not just for nuclearmaterial, but it is useful in preventing terrorism generally.  It's useful in identifying threats ofchemical weapons or biological weapons. 
One of the clear messages coming out of this summit and our experiences over the last sevenyears is an increasing awareness that some of the most important threats that we face aretransnational threats.
  
And so we are slowly developing a web of relationships around the world that allow us tomatch and keep up with the transnational organizations that all too often are involved interrorist activity, criminal activity, human trafficking, a whole range of issues that canultimately do our citizens harms.  And seeing the strengthening of these institutions I thinkwill be one of the most important legacies of this entire process. 
Mark Landler, since you had your hand up, I’ll call on you.  One last question.
Question:   Thank you, Mr. President.  I wanted to ask a question about nuclear policy. Through these past seven years when you've pushed to rid the world of nuclear materials andfissile material, the U.S. nuclear industry has actually worked to improve miniaturization ofwarheads.  And while it has not developed new classes of cruise missiles or warheads, it’sworked to improve the technology.  And that's prompted some in China and Russia to say,well, gee, we need to keep up.  Are you concerned that the technological advances in theUnited States have had the effect of sort of undermining some of the progress you've madeon the prevention side?
President Obama:  I think it’s a legitimate question, and I am concerned.  Here’s thebalance that we’ve had to strike.  We have a nuclear stockpile that we have to make sure issafe and make sure is reliable.
And after the START II Treaty that we entered into with Russia, we have brought downsignificantly the number of weapons that are active.  But we also have to make sure thatthey're up to date; that their command and control systems that might have been developeda while ago are up to snuff, given all the technology that has changed since that time.  Andwe have to make sure that our deterrence continues to work.
And so even as we’ve brought down the number of weapons that we have, I’ve wanted tomake sure that what we do retain functions -- that it is not subject to a cyber intrusion; thatthere’s sufficient confidence in the system that we don't create destabilizing activity.
My preference would be to bring down further our nuclear arsenal.  And after we completedSTART II, I approached the Russians -- our team approached the Russians in terms of lookingat a next phase for arms reductions.  Because Mr. Putin came into power, or returned to hisoffice as President, and because of the vision that he’s been pursuing of emphasizing militarymight over development inside of Russia and diversifying the economy, we have not seen thekind of progress that I would have hoped for with Russia.
The good news is that the possibilities of progress remain. We are abiding by START II.  We'reseeing implementation.  And although we are not likely to see further reductions during mypresidency, my hope is, is that we have built the mechanisms and systems of verification andso forth that will allow us to continue to reduce them in the future.
  
We do have to guard against, in the interim, ramping up new and more deadly and moreeffective systems that end up leading to a whole new escalation of the arms race.  And in ourmodernization plan, I’ve tried to strike the proper balance, making sure that the triad and oursystems work properly, that they’re effective, but also to make sure that we are leaving thedoor open to further reductions in the future.
But one of the challenges that we’re going to have here is that it is very difficult to see hugereductions in our nuclear arsenal unless the United States and Russia, as the two largestpossessors of nuclear weapons, are prepared to lead the way.  The other area where I thinkwe’d need to see progress is Pakistan and India, that subcontinent, making sure that as theydevelop military doctrines, that they are not continually moving in the wrong direction. 
And we have to take a look at the Korean Peninsula, because the DPRK, North Korea, is in awhole different category and poses the most immediate set of concerns for all of us, one thatwe are working internationally to focus on.  And that’s one of the reasons why we had thetrilateral meeting with Japan and Korea, and it was a major topic of discussion with PresidentXi, as well.
Thank you very much, everybody.  Have a good weekend.
