Good afternoon every -- or good morning, everybody.  I am here to answer questions inhonor of Ed Henry, as he wraps up his tenure as president of the White House CorrespondentsAssociation.
Ed, because of that, you get the first question.  Congratulations.
Question:  Thank you, sir, I really appreciate that.  And I hope we can go back to businessand being mad at each other a little bit.
President Obama:  I'm not mad at you.
Question:  Okay, good.  Thank you, I appreciate that.
President Obama:  You may be mad at me.
  
Question:   I'm not.  A couple of questions on national security.  On Syria, you said that thered line was not just about chemical weapons being used but being spread, and it was agame-changer -- it seemed cut and dry.  And now your administration seems to be suggestingthat line is not clear.  Do you risk U.S. credibility if you don't take military action?
And then on Benghazi, there are some survivors of that terror attack who say they want tocome forward and testify -- some in your State Department -- and they say they’ve beenblocked.  Will you allow them to testify?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, on Syria, I think it’s important to understand that forseveral years now what we've been seeing is a slowly unfolding disaster for the Syrian people.And this is not a situation in which we've been simply bystanders to what’s been happening. My policy from the beginning has been that President Assad had lost credibility, that heattacked his own people, has killed his own people, unleashed a military against innocentcivilians, and that the only way to bring stability and peace to Syria is going to be for Assad tostep down and to move forward on a political transition.
In pursuit of that strategy we've organized the international community.  We are the largesthumanitarian donor. We have worked to strengthen the opposition.  We have providednonlethal assistance to the opposition.  We have applied sanctions on Syria.  So there are awhole host of steps that we've been taking precisely because, even separate from thechemical weapons issue, what’s happening in Syria is a blemish on the internationalcommunity generally, and we've got to make sure that we're doing everything we can toprotect the Syrian people.
In that context, what I've also said is that the use of chemical weapons would be a game-
changer not simply for the United States but for the international community. And the reasonfor that is that we have established international law and international norms that say whenyou use these kinds of weapons you have the potential of killing massive numbers of people inthe most inhumane way possible, and the proliferation risks are so significant that we don'twant that genie out of the bottle.  So when I said that the use of chemical weapons would bea game-changer, that wasn’t unique to -- that wasn’t a position unique to the United Statesand it shouldn’t have been a surprise.
And what we now have is evidence that chemical weapons have been used inside of Syria, butwe don't know how they were used, when they were used, who used them. We don't have achain of custody that establishes what exactly happened.  And when I am making decisionsabout America’s national security and the potential for taking additional action in response tochemical weapon use, I've got to make sure I've got the facts.  That's what the Americanpeople would expect.
  
And if we end up rushing to judgment without hard, effective evidence, then we can findourselves in a position where we can't mobilize the international community to support whatwe do.  There may be objections even among some people in the region who are sympatheticwith the opposition if we take action.  So it’s important for us to do this in a prudent way.
And what I've said to my team is we've got to do everything we can to investigate andestablish with some certainty what exactly has happened in Syria, what is happening in Syria. We will use all the assets and resources that we have at our disposal. We'll work with theneighboring countries to see whether we can establish a clear baseline of facts.  And we'vealso called on the United Nations to investigate.
But the important point I want to make here is that we already are deeply engaged in tryingto bring about a solution in Syria.  It is a difficult problem.  But even if chemical weaponswere not being used in Syria, we’d still be thinking about tens of thousands of people,innocent civilians -- women, children -- who’ve been killed by a regime that’s more concernedabout staying in power than it is about the well-being of its people. And so we are alreadydeeply invested in trying to find a solution here.
What is true, though, is, is that if I can establish in a way that not only the United States butalso the international community feel confident is the use of chemical weapons by the Assadregime, then that is a game-changer because what that portends is potentially even moredevastating attacks on civilians, and it raises the strong possibility that those chemicalweapons can fall into the wrong hands and get disseminated in ways that would threaten U.S.security or the security of our allies.
Question:  By game-changer you mean U.S. military action?
President Obama:  By game-changer I mean that we would have to rethink the range ofoptions that are available to us. Now, we’re already, as I’ve said, invested in trying to bringabout a solution inside of Syria.  Obviously, there are options that are available to me that areon the shelf right now that we have not deployed.  And that’s a spectrum of options.  As earlyas last year, I asked the Pentagon, our military, our intelligence officials to prepare for mewhat options might be available.  And I won’t go into the details of what those options mightbe, but clearly that would be an escalation, in our view, of the threat to the security of theinternational community, our allies, and the United States, and that means that there aresome options that we might not otherwise exercise that we would strongly consider.
Question:  And on the Benghazi portion, I know pieces of this story have been litigated,you’ve been asked about it.  But there are people in your own State Department sayingthey’ve been blocked from coming forward, that they survived the terror attack and they wantto tell their story.  Will you help them come forward and just say it once and for all?
  
President Obama:  Ed, I’m not familiar with this notion that anybody has been blocked fromtestifying.  So what I’ll do is I will find out what exactly you’re referring to.  What I’ve beenvery clear about from the start is that our job with respect to Benghazi has been to find outexactly what happened, to make sure that U.S. embassies not just in the Middle East butaround the world are safe and secure, and to bring those who carried it out to justice. But I'llfind out what exactly you're referring to.
Question:  They've hired an attorney because they're saying that they've been blocked fromcoming forward.
President Obama:  I'm not familiar with it.
Jessica.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  There's a report that your Director of NationalIntelligence has ordered a broad review -- this is regards to the Boston Marathon bombing --that your DNI has ordered a broad review of all the intelligence-gathering prior to the attack. There is also a series of senators -- Susan Collins, Saxby Chambliss, Lindsey Graham -- whoallege that all these years after 9/11, there still wasn't enough intelligence shared prior to theattack.  And now, Lindsey Graham, who is a senior member of the Armed ServicesCommittee, has said that Benghazi and Boston are both examples of the U.S. goingbackwards on national security.  Is he right?  And did our intelligence miss something?
President Obama:  No, Mr. Graham is not right on this issue, although I'm sure generatedsome headlines. I think that what we saw in Boston was state, local, federal officials, everyagency rallying around a city that had been attacked -- identifying the perpetrators just hoursafter the scene had been examined.  We now have one individual deceased, one in custody. Charges have been brought.
I think that all our law enforcement officials performed in an exemplary fashion after thebombing had taken place.  And we should be very proud of their work, as obviously we'reproud of the people of Boston and all the first responders and the medical personnel thathelped save lives.
What we also know is that the Russian intelligence services had alerted U.S. intelligence aboutthe older brother, as well as the mother, indicating that they might be sympathizers toextremists.  The FBI investigated that older brother.  It's not as if the FBI did nothing.  Theynot only investigated the older brother, they interviewed the older brother.  They concludedthat there were no signs that he was engaging in extremist activity.  So that much we know.
And the question then is was there something that happened that triggered radicalization andan actual decision by the brother to engage in the tragic attack we actually saw in Boston, andare there additional things that could have been done in that interim that might haveprevented it.
  
Now, what Director Clapper is doing is standard procedure around here, which is when anevent like this happens we want to go back and we want to review every step that was taken. We want to leave no stone unturned.  We want to see, is there, in fact, additional protocolsand procedures that could be put in place that would further improve and enhance our abilityto detect a potential attack?  And we won't know that until that review is completed.  Wewon't know that until the investigation of the actual crime is fully completed.  And that's stillongoing.
But what I can say is that based on what I've seen so far, the FBI performed its duties, theDepartment of Homeland Security did what it was supposed to be doing.
But this is hard stuff.  And I’ve said for quite some time that because of the pressure that weput on al Qaeda core, because of the pressure that we’ve put on these networks that are well-
financed and more sophisticated and can engage in and project transnational threats againstthe United States, one of the dangers that we now face are self-radicalized individuals who arealready here in the United States -- in some cases, may not be part of any kind of network,but because of whatever warped, twisted ideas they may have, may decide to carry out anattack.  And those are in some ways more difficult to prevent.
And so what I’ve done for months now is to indicate to our entire counterterrorism team, whatmore can we do on that threat that is looming on the horizon?  Are there more things that wecan do, whether it’s engaging with communities where there’s a potential for self-
radicalization of this sort?  Is there work that can be done in terms of detection?  But all ofthis has to be done in the context of our laws, due process. And so part of what DirectorClapper is doing, then, is going to be to see if we can determine any lessons learned fromwhat happened.
Question:  Are you getting all the intelligence and information you need from the Russians?And should Americans be worried when they go to big, public events now?
President Obama:  The Russians have been very cooperative with us since the Bostonbombing.  Obviously, old habits die hard; there are still suspicions sometimes between ourintelligence and law enforcement agencies that date back 10, 20, 30 years, back to the ColdWar.  But they’re continually improving.  I’ve spoken to President Putin directly.  He’scommitted to working with me to make sure that those who report to us are cooperating fullyin not only this investigation, but how do we work on counterterrorism issues generally.
In terms of the response of the American people, I think everybody can take a cue fromBoston.  You don’t get a sense that anybody is intimidated when they go to Fenway Park acouple days after the bombing.  There are joggers right now, I guarantee you, all throughoutBoston and Cambridge and Watertown.  And I think one of the things that I’ve been mostproud of in watching the country’s response to the terrible tragedy there, is a sense ofresilience and toughness, and we’re not going to be intimidated. We are going to live ourlives.
  
And people, I think, understand that we’ve got to do everything we can to prevent these kindsof attacks from taking place, but people also understand -- in the same way they understandafter a shooting in Aurora or Newtown or Virginia Tech, or after the foiled attempts in TimesSquare or in Detroit -- that we’re not going to stop living our lives because warped, twistedindividuals try to intimidate us.  We’re going to do what we do -- which is go to work, raiseour kids, go to ball games, run in marathons.  And at the same time, we’re going to makesure that everybody is cooperating and is vigilant in doing everything we can, without beingnaïve, to try to prevent these attacks from happening in the future.
Jonathan Karl.
Question:  Mr. President, you are a hundred days into your second term.  On the gun bill,you put, it seems, everything into it to try to get it passed.  Obviously, it didn’t. Congress hasignored your efforts to try to get them to undo these sequester cuts. There’s even a bill thatyou threatened to veto that got 92 Democrats in the House voting yes.  So my question toyou is do you still have the juice to get the rest of your agenda through this Congress?
President Obama:  If you put it that way, Jonathan -- maybe I should just pack up and gohome.  Golly. I think it’s a little -- as Mark Twain said, rumors of my demise may be a littleexaggerated at this point.
We understand that we’re in a divided government right now. The Republicans control theHouse of Representatives.  In the Senate, this habit of requiring 60 votes for even the mostmodest piece of legislation has gummed up the works there.  And I think it comes as nosurprise not even to the American people, but even members of Congress themselves thatright now things are pretty dysfunctional up on Capitol Hill.
Despite that, I’m actually confident that there are a range of things that we’re going to beable to get done.  I feel confident that the bipartisan work that’s been done on immigrationreform will result in a bill that passes the Senate, passes the House, and gets on my desk. And that’s going to be a historic achievement.  And I’ve been very complimentary of theefforts of both Republicans and Democrats in those efforts.
It is true that the sequester is in place right now.  It’s damaging our economy.  It’s hurtingour people.  And we need to lift it.  What’s clear is, is that the only way we’re going to lift it isif we do a bigger deal that meets the test of lowering our deficit and growing our economy atthe same time.  And that’s going to require some compromises on the part of both Democratsand Republicans.
I’ve had some good conversations with Republican senators so far.  Those conversations arecontinuing.  I think there’s a genuine desire on many of their parts to move past not onlysequester but Washington dysfunction.  Whether we can get it done or not, we’ll see.
  
But I think the sequester is a good example -- or this recent FAA issue is a good example. You will recall that even as recently as my campaign, Republicans we’re saying, sequester isterrible, this is a disaster, it’s going to ruin our military, it’s going to be disastrous for theeconomy -- we've got to do something about it.  Then, when it was determined that doingsomething about it might mean that we close some tax loopholes for the wealthy and thewell-connected, suddenly, well, you know what, we’ll take the sequester.  And the notion wassomehow that we had exaggerated the effects of the sequester -- remember?  The Presidentis crying wolf.  He’s Chicken Little.  The sequester -- no problem.
And then in rapid succession, suddenly White House tours -- this is terrible!  How can we letthat happen?  Meat inspectors  -- we’ve got to fix that.  And, most recently, what are wegoing to do about potential delays at airports?
So despite the fact that a lot of members of Congress were suggesting that somehow thesequester was a victory for them and this wouldn’t hurt the economy, what we now know iswhat I warned earlier, what Jay stood up here and warned repeatedly, is happening.  It’sslowed our growth.  It’s resulting in people being thrown out of work. And it’s hurting folks allacross the country.
And the fact that Congress responded to the short-term problem of flight delays by giving usthe option of shifting money that’s designed to repair and improve airports over the long termto fix the short-term problem -- well, that’s not a solution.  And essentially what we’ve done iswe’ve said, in order to avoid delays this summer, we’re going to ensure delays for the nexttwo or three decades.
Question:  Why’d you go along with it?
President Obama:  Hold on a second. So the alternative, of course, is either to go ahead andimpose a whole bunch of delays on passengers now -- which also does not fix the problem --or the third alternative is to actually fix the problem by coming up with a broader, larger deal.
But, Jonathon, you seem to suggest that somehow these folks over there have noresponsibilities and that my job is to somehow get them to behave.  That’s their job. They’reelected -- members of Congress are elected in order to do what’s right for their constituenciesand for the American people.
So if, in fact, they are seriously concerned about passenger convenience and safety, then theyshouldn’t just be thinking about tomorrow or next week or the week after that; they should bethinking about what’s going to happen five years from now, 10 years from now, or 15 yearsfrom now.  The only way to do that is for them to engage with me on coming up with abroader deal.  And that’s exactly what I’m trying to do -- is to continue to talk to them aboutare there ways for us to fix this.
  
Frankly, I don’t think that if I were to veto, for example, this FAA bill, that that somehowwould lead to the broader fix.  It just means that there would be pain now, which they wouldtry to blame on me, as opposed to pain five years from now.  But either way, the problem isnot getting fixed.
The only way the problem does get fixed is if both parties sit down and they say: How are wegoing to make sure that we're reducing our deficit sensibly?  How are we making sure thatwe're investing in things like rebuilding our airports and our roads and our bridges, andinvesting in early childhood education, basic research -- all the things that are going to helpus grow? And that's what the American people want.
Just one interesting statistic when it comes to airports.  There was a recent survey of the topairports in the country -- in the world, and there was not a single U.S. airport that came in thetop 25.  Not one.  Not one U.S. airport was considered by the experts and consumers who usethese airports to be in the top 25 in the world.  I think Cincinnati Airport came in around 30th.
What does that say about our long-term competitiveness and future?  And so when folks say,well, there was some money in the FAA to deal with these furloughs -- well, yeah, the moneyis this pool of funds that are supposed to try to upgrade our airports so we don't rank in thebottom of industrialized countries when it comes to our infrastructure.
And that's what we're doing -- we're using our seed corn short term.  And the only reasonwe're doing it is because right now we've got folks who are unwilling to make some simplechanges to our tax code, for example, to close loopholes that aren't adding to ourcompetitiveness and aren't helping middle-class families.
So that's a long way of answering your question, but the point is that there are common-
sense solutions to our problems right now.  I cannot force Republicans to embrace thosecommon-sense solutions.  I can urge them to.  I can put pressure on them.  I can rally theAmerican people around those common-sense solutions.  But ultimately, they, themselves,are going to have to say, we want to do the right thing.
And I think there are members certainly in the Senate right now, and I suspect members inthe House as well, who understand that deep down.  But they're worried about their politics. It’s tough.  Their base thinks that compromise with me is somehow a betrayal.  They’reworried about primaries.  And I understand all that.  And we're going to try to do everythingwe can to create a permission structure for them to be able to do what’s going to be best forthe country.  But it’s going to take some time.
Bill Plante.
Question:  Mr. President, as you’re probably aware, there’s a growing hunger strike onGuantanamo Bay among prisoners there.  Is it any surprise really that they would preferdeath rather than have no end in sight to their confinement?
  
President Obama:  Well, it is not a surprise to me that we've got problems in Guantanamo,which is why when I was campaigning in 2007 and 2008, and when I was elected in 2008, Isaid we need to close Guantanamo.  I continue to believe that we've got to closeGuantanamo.
Question:  -- can do it?
President Obama:  Well, I think it is critical for us to understand that Guantanamo is notnecessary to keep America safe. It is expensive.  It is inefficient.  It hurts us in terms of ourinternational standing.  It lessens cooperation with our allies on counterterrorism efforts.  It isa recruitment tool for extremists.  It needs to be closed.
Now, Congress determined that they would not let us close it -- and despite the fact that thereare a number of the folks who are currently in Guantanamo who the courts have said could bereturned to their country of origin or potentially a third country.
I'm going to go back at this.  I've asked my team to review everything that's currently beingdone in Guantanamo, everything that we can do administratively.  And I'm going to reengagewith Congress to try to make the case that this is not something that's in the best interest ofthe American people.  And it's not sustainable.
The notion that we're going to continue to keep over a hundred individuals in a no-man's landin perpetuity, even at a time when we've wound down the war in Iraq, we're winding downthe war in Afghanistan, we're having success defeating al Qaeda core, we've kept the pressureup on all these transnational terrorist networks, when we've transferred detention authority inAfghanistan -- the idea that we would still maintain forever a group of individuals who havenot been tried, that is contrary to who we are, it is contrary to our interests, and it needs tostop.
Now, it's a hard case to make because I think for a lot of Americans the notion is out of sight,out of mind.  And it's easy to demagogue the issue.  That's what happened the first time thiscame up.  I'm going to go back at it because I think it's important.
Question:  Meanwhile we continue to force-feed these folks -- 
President Obama:  I don't want these individuals to die.  Obviously, the Pentagon is tryingto manage the situation as best as they can.  But I think all of us should reflect on whyexactly are we doing this?  Why are we doing this?  We've got a whole bunch of individualswho have been tried who are currently in maximum security prisons around the country. Nothing has happened to them.  Justice has been served.  It's been done in a way that'sconsistent with our Constitution, consistent with due process, consistent with rule of law,consistent with our traditions.
  
The individual who attempted to bomb Times Square -- in prison, serving a life sentence.  Theindividual who tried to bomb a plane in Detroit -- in prison, serving a life sentence.  A Somaliwho was part of Al-Shabaab, who we captured -- in prison. So we can handle this.
And I understand that in the immediate aftermath of 9/11, with the traumas that had takenplace, why, for a lot of Americans, the notion was somehow that we had to create a specialfacility like Guantanamo and we couldn’t handle this in a normal, conventional fashion.  Iunderstand that reaction.  But we’re now over a decade out. We should be wiser.  We shouldhave more experience in how we prosecute terrorists.
And this is a lingering problem that is not going to get better.  It’s going to get worse.  It’sgoing to fester.  And so I’m going to, as I said before, examine every option that we haveadministratively to try to deal with this issue, but ultimately we’re also going to need somehelp from Congress, and I’m going to ask some folks over there who care about fightingterrorism but also care about who we are as a people to step up and help me on it.
Chuck Todd.
Question:  Mr. President, thank you.  Max Baucus, Democratic Senator, referred to theimplementation as your health care law as a potential train wreck.  And other Democrats havebeen whispering nervousness about the implementation and the impact -- and it’s all self-
centered a little bit -- the impact that it might have on their own political campaigns in 2014. Why do you think -- just curious -- why does Senator Baucus, somebody who ostensiblyhelped write your bill, believe that this is going to be a train wreck?  And why do you believehe’s wrong?
President Obama:  Well, I think that any time you’re implementing something big, there’sgoing to be people who are nervous and anxious about is it going to get done, until it’sactually done.
But let’s just step back for a second and make sure the American people understand what it isthat we’re doing.  The Affordable Care Act -- Obamacare -- has now been with us for threeyears.  It’s gone through Supreme Court tests.  It’s gone through efforts to repeal.  A hugechunk of it has already been implemented.  And for the 85 to 90 percent of Americans whoalready have health insurance, they’re already experiencing most of the benefits of theAffordable Care Act even if they don’t know it. Their insurance is more secure.  Insurancecompanies can’t drop them for bad reasons.  Their kids are able to stay on their healthinsurance until they’re 26 years old.  They’re getting free preventive care.
So there are a whole host of benefits that, for the average American out there, for the 85 to90 percent of Americans who already have health insurance, this thing has already happened. And their only impact is that their insurance is stronger, better, more secure than it wasbefore.  Full stop.  That’s it.  They don’t have to worry about anything else.
  
The implementation issues come in for those who don’t have health insurance -- maybebecause they have a preexisting condition and the only way they can get health insurance isto go out on the individual market, and they’re paying 50 percent or 100 percent more thanthose of us who are lucky enough to have group plans; people who are too poor to get healthinsurance and the employers don’t offer them. Maybe they work for a small business and thissmall business can’t afford right now to provide health insurance.
So all the implementation issues that are coming up are implementation issues related to thatsmall group of people, 10 to 15 percent of Americans -- now, it’s still 30 million Americans,but a relatively narrow group -- who don’t have health insurance right now, or are on theindividual market and are paying exorbitant amounts for coverage that isn’t that great.
And what we’re doing is we’re setting up a pool so that they can all pool together and get abetter deal from insurance companies.  And those who can’t afford it, we’re going to providethem with some subsidies.  That’s it.  I mean, that’s what’s left to implement, because theother stuff has been implemented and it’s working fine.
The challenge is that setting up a market-based system, basically an online marketplacewhere you can go on and sign up and figure out what kind of insurance you can afford andfiguring out how to get the subsidies -- that’s still a big, complicated piece of business.  Andwhen you’re doing it nationwide, relatively fast, and you’ve got half of Congress who isdetermined to try to block implementation and not adequately funding implementation, andthen you’ve got a number of members of -- or governors -- Republican governors -- whoknow that it’s bad politics for them to try to implement this effectively, and some even whohave decided to implement it and then their Republican-controlled state legislatures say, don’timplement, and won’t pass enabling legislation -- when you have that kind of situation, thatmakes it harder.
But having said all that, we’ve got a great team in place.  We are pushing very hard to makesure that we’re hitting all the deadlines and the benchmarks. I’ll give you an example, arecent example.  We put together, initially, an application form for signing up for participationin the exchanges that was initially about 21 pages long, and immediately everybody sataround the table and said, well, this is too long. Especially in this age of the Internet, peoplearen’t going to have the patience to sit there for hours on end.  Let’s streamline this thing.  Sowe cut what was a 21-page form now down to a form that’s about three pages for anindividual, a little more than that for a family -- well below the industry average.  So thosekinds of refinements we’re going to continue to be working on.
But I think the main message I want to give to the American people here is, despite all thehue and cry and “sky is falling” predictions about this stuff, if you’ve already got healthinsurance, then that part of Obamacare that affects you, it’s pretty much already in place. And that’s about 85 percent of the country.
  
What is left to be implemented is those provisions to help the 10 to 15 percent of theAmerican public that is unlucky enough that they don’t have health insurance.  And by theway, some of you who have health insurance right now, at some point you may lose yourhealth insurance, and if you’ve got a preexisting condition, this structure will make sure thatyou are not left vulnerable.
But it’s still a big undertaking.  And what we’re doing is making sure that every single day weare constantly trying to hit our marks so that it will be in place.
And the last point I’ll make -- even if we do everything perfectly, there will still be glitches andbumps, and there will be stories that can be written that say, oh, look, this thing is notworking the way it’s supposed to, and this happened and that happened.  And that’s prettymuch true of every government program that’s ever been set up.  But if we stay with it andwe understand what our long-term objective is -- which is making sure that in a country aswealthy as ours, nobody should go bankrupt if they get sick, and that we would rather havepeople getting regular checkups than going to the emergency room because they don’t havehealth care -- if we keep that in mind, then we’re going to be able to drive down costs; we’regoing to be able to improve efficiencies in the system; we’re going to be able to see peoplebenefit from better health care.  And that will save the country money as a whole over thelong term.
Question:  Do you believe, without the cooperation of a handful of governors, particularlylarge states like Florida and Texas, that you can fully implement this?
President Obama::  I think it’s harder.  There’s no doubt about it.
Question:  But can you do it without them?
President Obama:  We will implement it.  There will be -- we have a backup federalexchange.  If states aren’t cooperating, we set up a federal exchange so that people canaccess that federal exchange. But, yes, it puts more of a burden on us.  And it’s ironic, sinceall these folks say that they believe in empowering states, that they’re going to end up havingthe federal government do something that we’d actually prefer states to do if they wereproperly cooperating. Let’s see how we’re doing on time here.  Last question.  Antonieta Cadiz-- where’s Antonieta?  There you are.  Tell those big guys to get out of your way.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Two questions.  There are concerns about how theimmigration bill from the House has complicated chances for immigration reform in theSenate.  It seems to be a more conservative proposal.  Is there room for a more conservativeproposal than the one presented in the Senate? That’s immigration.  Second, on Mexico --yesterday, the Mexican government said all contact with the U.S. law enforcement will now gothrough a single door, the Federal Interior Ministry.  Is this change good for the U.S.relationship with Mexico?  Do you think the level of security and cooperation can bemaintained?
  
President Obama:  On immigration reform, I’ve been impressed by the work that was doneby the Gang of Eight in the Senate.  The bill that they produced is not the bill that I wouldhave written, there are elements of it that I would change, but I do think that it meets thebasic criteria that I laid out from the start, which is:  We’ve got to have more effective bordersecurity -- although it should build on the great improvements that have been made on bordersecurity over the last four to five years.  We should make sure that we are cracking down onemployers that are gaming the system.  We should make the legal immigration system workmore effectively so that the waits are not as burdensome, the bureaucracy is not ascomplicated, so that we can continue to attract the best and the brightest from around theworld to our shores in a legal fashion.  And we want to make sure that we’ve got a pathway tocitizenship that is tough, but allows people to earn over time their legal status here in thiscountry.
And the Senate bill meets those criteria -- in some cases not in the way that I would, but itmeets those basic criteria.  And I think it’s a testament to the senators that were involved thatthey made some tough choices and made some tough compromises in order to hammer outthat bill.
Now, I haven’t seen what members of the House are yet proposing.  And maybe they thinkthat they can answer some of those questions differently or better.  And I think we’ve got tobe open-minded in seeing what they come up with.  The bottom line, though, is, is thatthey’ve still got to meet those basic criteria:  Is it making the border safer?  Is it dealing withemployers in how they work with the government to make sure that people are not beingtaken advantage of, or taking advantage of the system?  Are we improving our legalimmigration system?  And are we creating a pathway for citizenship for the 11 million or sowho are undocumented in this country?
And if they meet those criteria but they’re slightly different than the Senate bill, then I thinkthat we should be able to come up with an appropriate compromise.  If it doesn’t meet thosecriteria, then I will not support such a bill.  So we’ll have to wait and see.
When it comes to Mexico, I’m very much looking forward to taking the trip down to Mexico tosee the new President, Peña Nieto.  I had a chance to meet him here, but this will be the first,more extensive consultations and it will be an opportunity for his ministers, my Cabinetmembers who are participating to really hammer out some of these issues.
A lot of the focus is going to be on economics.  We’ve spent so much time on security issuesbetween the United States and Mexico that sometimes I think we forget this is a massivetrading partner responsible for huge amounts of commerce and huge numbers of jobs on bothsides of the border.  We want to see how we can deepen that, how we can improve that andmaintain that economic dialogue over a long period of time.
  
That doesn’t mean that we’re not going to be talking about security.  I think that in my firstconversation with the President, he indicated to me that he very much continues to beconcerned about how we can work together to deal with transnational drug cartels.  We’vemade great strides in the coordination and cooperation between our two governments overthe last several years.  But my suspicion is, is that things can be improved.
And some of the issues that he’s talking about really had to do with refinements andimprovements in terms of how Mexican authorities work with each other, how they coordinatemore effectively, and it has less to do with how they're dealing with us, per se.  So I’m notgoing to yet judge how this will alter the relationship between the United States and Mexicountil I’ve heard directly from them to see what exactly are they trying to accomplish.
But, overall, what I can say is that my impression is, is that the new President is serious aboutreform.  He’s already made some tough decisions.  I think he’s going to make more that willimprove the economy and security of Mexican citizens, and that will improve the bilateralrelationship as well.
And I don't want to leave out that we’re also going to be talking to, during my visit to CostaRica, Presidents of Central American countries, many of whom are struggling with botheconomic issues and security issues, but are important partners for us -- because I think thatthe vision here is that we want to make sure that our hemisphere is more effectivelyintegrated to improve the economy and security of all people. That's good for the UnitedStates.  That will enhance our economy.  That can improve our energy independence.
There are a whole range of opportunities, and that's going to be the purpose of this trip.  AndI’m sure that those of you who will have the chance to travel with me we’ll have a chance todiscuss this further.
All right?  Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you, guys.
Question:  Jason Collins?  Do you want to say anything about it?
President Obama:  Yes, I’ll say something about Jason Collins.  I had a chance to talk to himyesterday.  He seems like a terrific young man.  And I told him I couldn’t be prouder of him.One of the extraordinary measures of progress that we’ve seen in this country has been therecognition that the LGBT community deserves full equality -- not just partial equality, notjust tolerance, but a recognition that they're fully a part of the American family.
And given the importance of sports in our society, for an individual who has excelled at thehighest levels in one of the major sports to go ahead and say, this is who I am, I’m proud ofit, I’m still a great competitor, I’m still seven foot tall and can bang with Shaq -- and deliver ahard foul -- and for I think a lot of young people out there who are gay or lesbian who arestruggling with these issues, to see a role model like that who is unafraid, I think it’s a greatthing.
  
And I think America should be proud that this is just one more step in this ongoing recognitionthat we treat everybody fairly, and everybody is part of a family, and we judge people on thebasis of their character and their performance and not their sexual orientation.  So I’m veryproud of him.
All right?
