Thank you, President Varela.  Thank you very much, Panama, for hosting this Summit of theAmericas.  And I thank everybody who’s traveled here from across the region for thecourageous work that you do to defend freedom and human rights, and to promote equalityand opportunity and justice across our hemisphere and around the world. 
I am proud to be with you at this first-ever official gathering of civil society leaders at theSummit of the Americas. And I’m pleased to have Cuba represented with us at this summit forthe very first time.   
We’re here for a very simple reason.  We believe that strong, successful countries requirestrong and vibrant civil societies.  We know that throughout our history, human progress hasbeen propelled not just by famous leaders, not just by states, but by ordinary men andwomen who believe that change is possible; by citizens who are willing to stand up againstincredible odds and great danger not only to protect their own rights, but to extend rights toothers.
I had a chance to reflect on this last month when I was in the small town of Selma, Alabama. Some of you may have heard of it.  It’s a place where, 50 years ago, African-Americansmarched in peaceful, nonviolent protest -- not to ask for special treatment but to be treatedequally, in accordance with the founding documents of our Declaration of Independence, ourBill of Rights.
  
They were part of a civil rights movement that had endured violence and repression fordecades, and would endure it again that day, as many of the marchers were beaten. 
But they kept marching.  And despite the beatings of that day, they came back, and morereturned.  And the conscience of a nation was stirred.  Their efforts bent, in the words of Dr.Martin Luther King, the arc of the moral universe towards justice.  And it was their vision for amore fair and just and inclusive and generous society that ultimately triumphed.  And the onlyreason I stand here today as the President of the United States is because those ordinarypeople -- maids, and janitors, and schoolteachers -- were willing to endure hardship on mybehalf.   
And that's why I believe so strongly in the work that you do.  It's the dreamers -- no matterhow humble or poor or seemingly powerless -- that are able to change the course of humanevents.  We saw it in South Africa, where citizens stood up to the scourge of apartheid.  Wesaw it in Europe, where Poles marched in Solidarity to help bring down the Iron Curtain.  InArgentina, where mothers of the disappeared spoke out against the Dirty War.  It’s the storyof my country, where citizens worked to abolish slavery, and establish women’s rights andworkers’ rights, and rights for gays and lesbians.
It’s not to say that my country is perfect -- we are not.  And that’s the point.  We always haveto have citizens who are willing to question and push our government, and identify injustice. We have to wrestle with our own challenges -- from issues of race to policing to inequality. But what makes me most proud about the extraordinary example of the United States is notthat we’re perfect, but that we struggle with it, and we have this open space in which societycan continually try to make us a more perfect union. 
We’ve stood up, at great cost, for freedom and human dignity, not just in our own country,but elsewhere.  I’m proud of that.  And we embrace our ability to become better through ourdemocracy.  And that requires more than just the work of government.  It demands the hardand frustrating, sometimes, but absolutely vital work of ordinary citizens coming together tomake common cause. 
So civil society is the conscience of our countries.  It’s the catalyst of change.  It’s why strongnations don’t fear active citizens.  Strong nations embrace and support and empower activecitizens.  And by the way, it’s not as if active citizens are always right -- they’re not. Sometimes people start yelling at me or arguing at me, and I think, you don’t know whatyou’re talking about.  But sometimes they do.  And the question is not whether they’re alwaysright; the question is, do you have a society in which that conversation, that debate can betested and ideas are tested in the marketplace.
And because of the efforts of civil society, now, by and large, there’s a consensus in theAmericas on democracy and human rights, and social development and social inclusiveness.
  
I recognize there’s strong differences about the role of civil society, but I believe we can allbenefit from open and tolerant and inclusive dialogue.  And we should reject violence orintimidation that’s aimed at silencing people’s voices. 
The freedom to be heard is a principle that the Americas at large is committed to.  And thatdoesn’t mean, as I said, that we’re going to agree on every issue.  But we should addressthose issue candidly and honestly and civilly, and welcome the voices of all of our people intothe debates that shape the future of the hemisphere.   
Just to take one example:  As the United States begins a new chapter in our relationship withCuba, we hope it will create an environment that improves the lives of the Cuban people -–not because it’s imposed by us, the United States, but through the talent and ingenuity andaspirations, and the conversation among Cubans from all walks of life so they can decide whatthe best course is for their prosperity. 
As we move toward the process of normalization, we’ll have our differences, government togovernment, with Cuba on many issues -- just as we differ at times with other nations withinthe Americas; just as we differ with our closest allies.  There’s nothing wrong with that.  ButI’m here to say that when we do speak out, we’re going to do so because the United States ofAmerica does believe, and will always stand for, a certain set of universal values.  And whenwe do partner with civil society, it’s because we believe our relationship should be withgovernments and with the peoples that they represent. 
It’s also because we believe that your work is more important than ever.  Here in theAmericas, inequality still locks too many people out of our economies.  Discrimination stilllocks too many out of our societies.  Around the world, there are still too many places wherelaws are passed to stifle civil society, where governments cut off funding for groups that theydon’t agree with.  Where entrepreneurs are crushed under corruption.  Where activists andjournalists are locked up on trumped-up charges because they dare to be critical of theirgovernments.  Where the way you look, or how you pray, or who you love can get youimprisoned or killed. 
And whether it’s crackdowns on free expression in Russia or China, or restrictions on freedomof association and assembly in Egypt, or prison camps run by the North Korean regime --human rights and fundamental freedoms are still at risk around the world.  And when thathappens, we believe we have a moral obligation to speak out. 
We also know that our support for civil society is not just about what we’re against, but alsowhat we’re for.  Because we’ve noticed that governments that are more responsive andeffective are typically governments where the people are free to assemble, and speak theirminds, and petition their leaders, and hold us accountable. 
  
We know that our economies attract more trade and investment when citizens are free tostart a new business without paying a bribe.   We know that our societies are more likely tosucceed when all our people -- regardless of color, or class, or creed, or sexual orientation, orgender -- are free to live and pray and love as they choose.  That’s what we believe.
And, increasingly, civil society is a source of ideas -- about everything from promotingtransparency and free expression, to reversing inequality and rescuing our environment.  Andthat’s why, as part of our Stand with Civil Society Initiative, we’ve joined with people aroundthe world to push back on those who deny your right to be heard.  I’ve made it a mission ofour government not only to protect civil society groups, but to partner with you and empoweryou with the knowledge and the technology and the resources to put your ideas into action. And the U.S. supports the efforts to establish a permanent, meaningful role for civil societiesin future Summits of the Americas.   
So let me just say, when the United States sees space closing for civil society, we will work toopen it.  When efforts are made to wall you off from the world, we’ll try to connect you witheach other.  When you are silenced, we’ll try to speak out alongside you.  And when you’resuppressed, we want to help strengthen you.  As you work for change, the United States willstand up alongside you every step of the way.  We are respectful of the difference among ourcountries.  The days in which our agenda in this hemisphere so often presumed that theUnited States could meddle with impunity, those days are past.   
But what it does mean -- but we do have to be very clear that when we speak out on behalf ofsomebody who’s been imprisoned for no other reason than because they spoke truth topower, when we are helping an organization that is trying to empower a minority group insidea country to get more access to resources, we’re not doing that because it serves our owninterests; we’re doing it because we think it’s the right thing to do.    And that’s important. 
And I hope that all the other countries at the Summit of the Americas will join us in seeingthat it’s important.  Because sometimes, as difficult as it is, it’s important for us to be able tospeak honestly and candidly on behalf of people who are vulnerable and people who arepowerless, people who are voiceless.  I know, because there was a time in our own countrywhere there were groups that were voiceless and powerless.  And because of world opinion,that helped to change those circumstance.  We have a debt to pay, because the voices ofordinary people have made us better.  That’s a debt that I want to make sure we repay in thishemisphere and around the world.
Thank you very much, everybody.
God bless you.
