To the Fort Hood community; to Admiral Mullen; General Casey; General Cone; SecretaryMcHugh; Secretary Gates; most importantly, to family, friends, and members of our ArmedForces: We come together filled with sorrow for the 13 Americans that we have lost, withgratitude for the lives that they led, and with a determination to honor them through the workwe carry on.
This is a time of war. Yet these Americans did not die on a foreign field of battle. They werekilled here, on American soil, in the heart of this great state and the heart of this greatAmerican community. This is the fact that makes the tragedy even more painful, even moreincomprehensible.
For those families who have lost a loved one, no words can fill the void that's been left. Weknew these men and women as soldiers and caregivers. You knew them as mothers andfathers, sons and daughters, sisters and brothers.
But here is what you must also know: Your loved ones endure through the life of our nation. Their memory will be honored in the places they lived and by the people they touched. Theirlife's work is our security, and the freedom that we all too often take for granted. Everyevening that the sun sets on a tranquil town; every dawn that a flag is unfurled; everymoment that an American enjoys life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness -- that is theirlegacy. 
Neither this country, nor the values upon which we were founded, could exist without menand women like these 13 Americans. And that is why we must pay tribute to their stories.

Chief Warrant Officer Michael Cahill had served in the National Guard and worked as aphysician's assistant for decades. A husband and father of three, he was so committed to hispatients that on the day he died he was back at work just weeks after having had a heartattack.
Major Libardo Eduardo Caraveo spoke little English when he came to America as ateenager. But he put himself through college, earned a Ph.D., and was helping combat unitscope with the stress of deployment. He's survived by his wife, sons, and step-daughters.    Staff Sergeant Justin DeCrow joined the Army right after high school, married his high schoolsweetheart, and had served as a light wheeled mechanic and satellite communicationsoperator. He was known as an optimist, a mentor, and a loving husband and loving father.
After retiring from the Army as a major, John Gaffaney cared for society's most vulnerableduring two decades as a psychiatric nurse. He spent three years trying to return to active dutyin this time of war, and he was preparing to deploy to Iraq as a captain. He leaves behind awife and son.
Specialist Frederick Greene was a Tennessean who wanted to join the Army for a long time,and did so in 2008, with the support of his family. As a combat engineer he was a naturalleader, and he is survived by his wife and two daughters.
Specialist Jason Hunt was also recently married, with three children to care for. He joined theArmy after high school.  He did a tour in Iraq, and it was there that he reenlisted for six moreyears on his 21st birthday so that he could continue to serve.
Staff Sergeant Amy Krueger was an athlete in high school, joined the Army shortly after 9/11,and had since returned home to speak to students about her experience.  When her mothertold her she couldn't take on Osama bin Laden by herself, Amy replied: "Watch me."
Private First Class Aaron Nemelka was an Eagle Scout who just recently signed up to do one ofthe most dangerous jobs in the service -- diffuse bombs -- so that he could help save lives. Hewas proudly carrying on a tradition of military service that runs deep within his family. 
Private First Class Michael Pearson loved his family and loved his music, and his goal was tobe a music teacher. He excelled at playing the guitar, and could create songs on the spot andshow others how to play. He joined the military a year ago, and was preparing for his firstdeployment.
Captain Russell Seager worked as a nurse for the VA, helping veterans with Post-TraumaticStress. He had extraordinary respect for the military, and signed up to serve so that he couldhelp soldiers cope with the stress of combat and return to civilian life. He leaves behind a wifeand son.

Private Francheska Velez, daughter of a father from Colombia and a Puerto Rican mother, hadrecently served in Korea and in Iraq, and was pursuing a career in the Army. When she waskilled she was pregnant with her first child, and was excited about becoming a mother.
Lieutenant Colonel Juanita Warman was the daughter and granddaughter of Armyveterans. She was a single mom who put herself through college and graduate school, andserved as a nurse practitioner while raising her two daughters. She also left behind a lovinghusband.
Private First Class Kham Xiong came to America from Thailand as a small child. He was ahusband and father who followed his brother into the military because his family had a stronghistory of service. He was preparing for his first deployment to Afghanistan.
These men and women came from all parts of the country. Some had long careers in themilitary. Some had signed up to serve in the shadow of 9/11. Some had known intensecombat in Iraq and Afghanistan, and some cared for those did. Their lives speak to thestrength, the dignity, the decency of those who serve, and that's how they will beremembered.
For that same spirit is embodied in the community here at Fort Hood, and in the manywounded who are still recovering. As was already mentioned, in those terrible minutes duringthe attack, soldiers made makeshift tourniquets out of their clothes. They braved gunfire toreach the wounded, and ferried them back to safety in the backs of cars and a pickup truck.
One young soldier, Amber Bahr, was so intent on helping others, she did not realize for sometime that she, herself, had been shot in the back. Two police officers -- Mark Todd and KimMunley -- saved countless lives by risking their own. One medic -- Francisco de la Serna --treated both Officer Munley and the gunman who shot her.
It may be hard to comprehend the twisted logic that led to this tragedy. But this much we doknow: No faith justifies these murderous and craven acts. No just and loving God looks uponthem with favor. For what he has done, we know that the killer will be met with justice -- inthis world, and the next.
These are trying times for our country. In Afghanistan and Pakistan, the same extremists whokilled nearly 3,000 Americans continue to endanger America, our allies, and innocent Afghansand Pakistanis.
In Iraq, we're working to bring a war to a successful end, as there are still those who woulddeny the Iraqi people the future that Americans and Iraqis have sacrificed so much for.

As we face these challenges, the stories of those at Fort Hood reaffirm the core values that weare fighting for, and the strength that we must draw upon. Theirs are the tales of Americanmen and women answering an extraordinary call -- the call to serve their comrades, theircommunities, and their country. In an age of self -- selfishness, they embody responsibility. Inan era of division, they call upon us to come together. In a time of cynicism, they remind usof who we are as Americans.
We are a nation that endures because of the courage of those who defend it. We saw thatvalor in those who braved bullets here at Fort Hood, just as surely as we see it in those whosigned up knowing they would serve in harm’s way.
We are a nation of laws whose commitment to justice is so enduring that we would treat agunman and give him due process, just as surely as we will see that he pays for his crimes.
We're a nation that guarantees the freedom to worship as one chooses. And instead ofclaiming God for our side, we remember Lincoln’s words, and always pray to be on the side ofGod.
We're a nation that is dedicated to the proposition that all men and women are created equal. We live that truth within our military, and see it in the varied backgrounds of those we lay torest today. We defend that truth at home and abroad, and we know that Americans willalways be found on the side of liberty and equality. That's who we are as a people.
Tomorrow is Veterans Day. It's a chance to pause, and to pay tribute -- for students to learnthe struggles that preceded them; for families to honor the service of parents andgrandparents; for citizens to reflect upon the sacrifices that have been made in pursuit of amore perfect union.
For history is filled with heroes. You may remember the stories of a grandfather who marchedacross Europe; an uncle who fought in Vietnam; a sister who served in the Gulf. But as wehonor the many generations who have served, all of us -- every single American -- mustacknowledge that this generation has more than proved itself the equal of those who've comebefore. We need not look to the past for greatness, because it is before our very eyes.
This generation of soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen have volunteeredin the time of certain danger. They are part of the finest fighting force that the world has everknown. They have served tour after tour of duty in distant, different, and difficult places. Theyhave stood watch in blinding deserts and on snowy mountains.
They have extended the opportunity of self-government to peoples that have suffered tyrannyand war. They are men and women -- white, black, and brown -- of all faiths and all stations -
- all Americans, serving together to protect our people, while giving others half a world awaythe chance to lead a better life.

In today’s wars, there's not always a simple ceremony that signals our troops’ success -- nosurrender papers to be signed, or capital to be claimed. But the measure of the impact ofthese young men and women is no less great. In a world of threats that no know borders,their legacy will be marked in the safety of our cities and towns, and the security andopportunity that's extended abroad. It will serve as testimony to the character of those whoserved, and the example that all of you in uniform set for America and for the world.
Here at Fort Hood, we pay tribute to 13 men and women who were not able to escape thehorror of war, even in the comfort of home. Later today at Fort Lewis, one community willgather to remember so many in one Stryker Brigade who have fallen in Afghanistan.
Long after they are laid to rest -- when the fighting has finished, and our nation has endured;when today’s servicemen and women are veterans and their children have grown -- it will besaid that this generation believed under the most trying of tests; believed in perseverance --not just when it was easy, but when it was hard; that they paid the price and bore the burdento secure this nation, and stood up for the values that live in the hearts of all free peoples.
So we say goodbye to those who now belong to eternity.
We press ahead in pursuit of the peace that guided their service.
May God bless the memory of those that we have lost.
And may God bless the United States of America.