Hello, Warsaw!  Witaj, Polsko!
Mr. President; Mr. Prime Minister; Madam Mayor; heads of state and government, past andpresent -- including the man who jumped that shipyard wall to lead a strike that became amovement, the prisoner turned President who transformed this nation -- thank you, LechWalesa, for your outstanding leadership.
Distinguished guests, people of Poland, thank you for your extraordinary welcome and for theprivilege of joining you here today.  I bring with me the greetings and friendship of theAmerican people -- and of my hometown of Chicago, home to so many proud PolishAmericans.  In Chicago, we think of ourselves as a little piece of Poland.  In someneighborhoods, you only hear Polish.  The faithful come together at churches like SaintStanislaus Kostka.  We have a parade for Polish Constitution Day.  And every summer, wecelebrate the Taste of Polonia, with our kielbasa and pierogies, and we’re all a little bit Polishfor that day. So being here with you, it feels like home.
Twenty-five years ago today, we witnessed a scene that had once seemed impossible -- anelection where, for the first time, the people of this nation had a choice.  The Communistregime thought an election would validate their rule or weaken the opposition.  Instead, Polesturned out in the millions.  And when the votes were counted, it was a landslide victory forfreedom.  One woman who voted that day said, “There is a sense that something is beginningto happen in Poland.  We feel the taste of Poland again.”  She was right.  It was the beginningof the end of Communism -- not just in this country, but across Europe.
  
The images of that year are seared in our memory.  Citizens filling the streets of Budapest andBucharest.  Hungarians and Austrians cutting the barbed wire border.  Protestors joininghands across the Baltics.  Czechs and Slovaks in their Velvet Revolution.  East Berlinersclimbing atop that wall.  And we have seen the extraordinary progress since that time.  Aunited Germany.  Nations in Central and Eastern Europe standing tall as proud democracies. A Europe that is more integrated, more prosperous and more secure.  We must never forgetthat the spark for so much of this revolutionary change, this blossoming of hope, was lit byyou, the people of Poland.
History was made here.  The victory of 1989 was not inevitable.  It was the culmination ofcenturies of Polish struggle, at times in this very square.  The generations of Poles who roseup and finally won independence.  The soldiers who resisted invasion, from the east and thewest.  The Righteous Among the Nations -- among them Jan Karski -- who risked all to savethe innocent from the Holocaust.  The heroes of the Warsaw Ghetto who refused to go withouta fight.  The Free Poles at Normandy and the Poles of the Home Army who -- even as this citywas reduced to rubble -- waged a heroic uprising. 
We remember how, when an Iron Curtain descended, you never accepted your fate.  When ason of Poland ascended to the Chair of Saint Peter, he returned home, and here, in Warsaw,he inspired a nation with his words -- “there can be no just Europe without the independenceof Poland.”  And today we give thanks for the courage of the Catholic Church and the fearlessspirit of Saint John Paul II.
We also recall how you prevailed 25 years ago.  In the face of beatings and bullets, you neverwavered from the moral force of nonviolence.  Through the darkness of martial law, Poles litcandles in their windows.  When the regime finally agreed to talk, you embraced dialogue. When they held those elections -- even though not fully free -- you participated.  As oneSolidarity leader said at the time, “We decided to accept what was possible.”  Poland remindsus that sometimes the smallest steps, however imperfect, can ultimately tear down walls, canultimately transform the world.
But of course, your victory that June day was only the beginning.  For democracy is more thanjust elections.  True democracy, real prosperity, lasting security -- these are neither simplygiven, nor imposed from the outside.  They must be earned and built from within.  And in thatage-old contest of ideas -- between freedom and authoritarianism, between liberty andoppression, between solidarity and intolerance -- Poland’s progress shows the enduringstrength of the ideals that we cherish as a free people.
Here we see the strength of democracy:  Citizens raising their voices, free from fear.  Here wesee political parties competing in open and honest elections.  Here we see an independentjudiciary working to uphold the rule of law.  Here in Poland we see a vibrant press and agrowing civil society that holds leaders accountable -- because governments exist to lift uptheir people, not to hold them down.
  
Here we see the strength of free markets and the results of hard reforms -- gleamingskyscrapers soaring above the city, and superhighways across this country, high-tech hubsand living standards that previous generations of Poles could only imagine. This is the newPoland you have built -- an economic “Miracle on the Vistula” -- Cud nad Wisłą.
Here we see the strength of free nations that stand united. Across those centuries of struggle,Poland’s fate too often was dictated by others.  This land was invaded and conquered, carvedup and occupied.  But those days are over.  Poland understands as few other nations do thatevery nation must be free to chart its own course, to forge its own partnerships, to choose itsown allies.
This year marks the 15th anniversary of Poland’s membership in NATO.  We honor Polishservice in the Balkans, in Iraq and Afghanistan.  And as Americans, we are proud to callPoland one of our strongest and closest allies.
This is the Poland we celebrate today.  The free and democratic Poland that your forebearsand some who are here today dreamed of and fought for and, in some cases, died for.  Thegrowing and secure Poland that you -- particularly the young people who are here today --have enjoyed for your entire lives.
It’s a wonderful story, but the story of this nation reminds us that freedom is not guaranteed. And history cautions us to never take progress for granted.  On the same day 25 years agothat Poles were voting here, tanks were crushing peaceful democracy protests in TiananmenSquare on the other side of the world.  The blessings of liberty must be earned and renewedby every generation -- including our own.  This is the work to which we rededicate ourselvestoday. 
Our democracies must be defined not by what or who we’re against, but by a politics ofinclusion and tolerance that welcomes all our citizens.  Our economies must deliver a broaderprosperity that creates more opportunity -- across Europe and across the world -- especiallyfor young people.  Leaders must uphold the public trust and stand against corruption, notsteal from the pockets of their own people.  Our societies must embrace a greater justice thatrecognizes the inherent dignity of every human being.  And as we’ve been reminded byRussia’s aggression in Ukraine, our free nations cannot be complacent in pursuit of the visionwe share -- a Europe that is whole and free and at peace.  We have to work for that.  Wehave to stand with those who seek freedom.
I know that throughout history, the Polish people were abandoned by friends when youneeded them most.  So I’ve come to Warsaw today -- on behalf of the United States, onbehalf of the NATO Alliance -- to reaffirm our unwavering commitment to Poland’s security. Article 5 is clear -- an attack on one is an attack on all.  And as allies, we have a solemn duty-- a binding treaty obligation -- to defend your territorial integrity.  And we will.
  
We stand together -- now and forever -- for your freedom is ours.  Poland will never standalone.  But not just Poland -- Estonia will never stand alone.  Latvia will never stand alone. Lithuania will never stand alone.  Romania will never stand alone.
These are not just words.  They’re unbreakable commitments backed by the strongest alliancein the world and the armed forces of the United States of America -- the most powerfulmilitary in history.  You see our commitment today. In NATO aircraft in the skies of theBaltics.  In allied ships patrolling the Black Sea.  In the stepped-up exercises where our forcestrain together.  And in our increased and enduring American presence here on Polish soil.  Wedo these things not to threaten any nation, but to defend the security and territory ofourselves and our friends. 
Yesterday, I announced a new initiative to bolster the security of our NATO allies and increaseAmerica’s military presence in Europe.  With the support of Congress, this will mean morepre-positioned equipment to respond quickly in a crisis, and exercises and training to keep ourforces ready; additional U.S. forces -- in the air, and sea, and on land, including here inPoland.  And it will mean increased support to help friends like Ukraine, and Moldova andGeorgia provide for their own defense.
Just as the United States is increasing our commitment, so must others.  Every NATO memberis protected by our alliance, and every NATO member must carry its share in our alliance. This is the responsibility we have to each other.
Finally, as free peoples, we join together, not simply to safeguard our own security but toadvance the freedom of others. Today we affirm the principles for which we stand. 
We stand together because we believe that people and nations have the right to determinetheir own destiny.  And that includes the people of Ukraine.  Robbed by a corrupt regime,Ukrainians demanded a government that served them.  Beaten and bloodied, they refused toyield.  Threatened and harassed, they lined up to vote; they elected a new President in a freeelection -- because a leader’s legitimacy can only come from the consent of the people.
Ukrainians have now embarked on the hard road of reform.  I met with President-electPoroshenko this morning, and I told him that, just as free nations offered support andassistance to Poland in your transition to democracy, we stand with Ukrainians now.  Ukrainemust be free to choose its own future for itself and by itself.  We reject the zero-sum thinkingof the past -- a free and independent Ukraine needs strong ties and growing trade with Europeand Russia and the United States and the rest of the world.  Because the people of Ukraineare reaching out for the same freedom and opportunities and progress that we celebrate heretoday -- and they deserve them, too.
  
We stand together because we believe that upholding peace and security is the responsibilityof every nation.  The days of empire and spheres of influence are over.  Bigger nations mustnot be allowed to bully the small, or impose their will at the barrel of a gun or with maskedmen taking over buildings.  And the stroke of a pen can never legitimize the theft of aneighbor’s land.  So we will not accept Russia’s occupation of Crimea or its violation ofUkraine’s sovereignty.  Our free nations will stand united so that further Russian provocationswill only mean more isolation and costs for Russia.  Because after investing so much bloodand treasure to bring Europe together, how can we allow the dark tactics of the 20th centuryto define this new century?
We stand together because we know that the spirit of Warsaw and Budapest and Prague andBerlin stretches to wherever the longing for freedom stirs in human hearts, whether in Minskor Caracas, or Damascus or Pyongyang.  Wherever people are willing to do the hard work ofbuilding democracy -- from Tbilisi to Tunis, from Rangoon to Freetown -- they will have apartner in our nations.  For in the struggles of these citizens we recall our own struggles.  Intheir faces we see our own.  And few see this more clearly than the people of Poland.
The Ukrainians of today are the heirs of Solidarity -- men and women like you who dared tochallenge a bankrupt regime.  When your peaceful protests were met with an iron fist, Polesplaced flowers in the shipyard gate. 
Today, Ukrainians honor their fallen with flowers in Independence Square.  We remember thePolish voter who rejoiced to “feel the taste of Poland again.”  Her voice echoes in the youngprotestor in the Maidan who savored what she called “a taste of real freedom.”  “I love mycountry,” she said, and we are standing up for “justice and freedom.”  And with gratitude forthe strong support of the Polish people, she spoke for many Ukrainians when she said, “Thankyou, Poland.  We hear you and we love you.”
Today we can say the same.  Thank you, Poland -- thank you for your courage.  Thank you forreminding the world that no matter how brutal the crackdown, no matter how long the night,the yearning for liberty and dignity does not fade away.  It will never go away.  Thank you,Poland, for your iron will and for showing that, yes, ordinary citizens can grab the reins ofhistory, and that freedom will prevail -- because, in the end, tanks and troops are no matchfor the force of our ideals. 
Thank you, Poland -- for your triumph -- not of arms, but of the human spirit, the truth thatcarries us forward. There is no change without risk, and no progress without sacrifice, and nofreedom without solidarity.
Dziękuję, Polsko!  God bless Poland.  God bless America.  God bless our unbreakable alliance.
Thank you very much.
