To the King family, who have sacrificed and inspired so much; to President Clinton; PresidentCarter; Vice President Biden and Jill; fellow Americans.  
Five decades ago today, Americans came to this honored place to lay claim to a promise madeat our founding:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they areendowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are Life,Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.
In 1963, almost 200 years after those words were set to paper, a full century after a greatwar was fought and emancipation proclaimed, that promise -- those truths -- remainedunmet.  And so they came by the thousands from every corner of our country, men andwomen, young and old, blacks who longed for freedom and whites who could no longer acceptfreedom for themselves while witnessing the subjugation of others.
Across the land, congregations sent them off with food and with prayer.  In the middle of thenight, entire blocks of Harlem came out to wish them well.  With the few dollars they scrimpedfrom their labor, some bought tickets and boarded buses, even if they couldn’t always sitwhere they wanted to sit.  Those with less money hitchhiked or walked.
  
They were seamstresses and steelworkers, students and teachers, maids and Pullmanporters.  They shared simple meals and bunked together on floors.  And then, on a hotsummer day, they assembled here, in our nation’s capital, under the shadow of the GreatEmancipator -- to offer testimony of injustice, to petition their government for redress, and toawaken America’s long-slumbering conscience.
We rightly and best remember Dr. King’s soaring oratory that day, how he gave mighty voiceto the quiet hopes of millions; how he offered a salvation path for oppressed and oppressorsalike.  His words belong to the ages, possessing a power and prophecy unmatched in ourtime.
But we would do well to recall that day itself also belonged to those ordinary people whosenames never appeared in the history books, never got on TV.  Many had gone to segregatedschools and sat at segregated lunch counters.  They lived in towns where they couldn’t voteand cities where their votes didn’t matter.  They were couples in love who couldn’t marry,soldiers who fought for freedom abroad that they found denied to them at home.  They hadseen loved ones beaten, and children fire-hosed, and they had every reason to lash out inanger, or resign themselves to a bitter fate.
And yet they chose a different path.  In the face of hatred, they prayed for their tormentors. In the face of violence, they stood up and sat in, with the moral force of nonviolence. Willingly, they went to jail to protest unjust laws, their cells swelling with the sound offreedom songs.  A lifetime of indignities had taught them that no man can take away thedignity and grace that God grants us.  They had learned through hard experience whatFrederick Douglass once taught -- that freedom is not given, it must be won, through struggleand discipline, persistence and faith.
That was the spirit they brought here that day.  That was the spirit young people like JohnLewis brought to that day.  That was the spirit that they carried with them, like a torch, backto their cities and their neighborhoods.  That steady flame of conscience and courage thatwould sustain them through the campaigns to come -- through boycotts and voter registrationdrives and smaller marches far from the spotlight; through the loss of four little girls inBirmingham, and the carnage of the Edmund Pettus Bridge, and the agony of Dallas andCalifornia and Memphis.  Through setbacks and heartbreaks and gnawing doubt, that flame ofjustice flickered; it never died.
And because they kept marching, America changed.  Because they marched, a Civil Rights lawwas passed.  Because they marched, a Voting Rights law was signed.  Because they marched,doors of opportunity and education swung open so their daughters and sons could finallyimagine a life for themselves beyond washing somebody else’s laundry or shining somebodyelse’s shoes.  Because they marched, city councils changed and state legislatures changed,and Congress changed, and, yes, eventually, the White House changed.
  
Because they marched, America became more free and more fair -- not just for AfricanAmericans, but for women and Latinos, Asians and Native Americans; for Catholics, Jews, andMuslims; for gays, for Americans with a disability.  America changed for you and for me.  andthe entire world drew strength from that example, whether the young people who watchedfrom the other side of an Iron Curtain and would eventually tear down that wall, or the youngpeople inside South Africa who would eventually end the scourge of apartheid.
Those are the victories they won, with iron wills and hope in their hearts.  That is thetransformation that they wrought, with each step of their well-worn shoes.  That’s the debtthat I and millions of Americans owe those maids, those laborers, those porters, thosesecretaries; folks who could have run a company maybe if they had ever had a chance; thosewhite students who put themselves in harm’s way, even though they didn't have; thoseJapanese Americans who recalled their own internment; those Jewish Americans who hadsurvived the Holocaust; people who could have given up and given in, but kept on keeping on,knowing that “weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.”
On the battlefield of justice, men and women without rank or wealth or title or fame wouldliberate us all in ways that our children now take for granted, as people of all colors andcreeds live together and learn together and walk together, and fight alongside one another,and love one another, and judge one another by the content of our character in this greatestnation on Earth.
To dismiss the magnitude of this progress -- to suggest, as some sometimes do, that little haschanged -- that dishonors the courage and the sacrifice of those who paid the price to marchin those years. Medgar Evers, James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, MartinLuther King Jr. -- they did not die in vain.  Their victory was great. 
But we would dishonor those heroes as well to suggest that the work of this nation issomehow complete.  The arc of the moral universe may bend towards justice, but it doesn’tbend on its own.  To secure the gains this country has made requires constant vigilance, notcomplacency.  Whether by challenging those who erect new barriers to the vote, or ensuringthat the scales of justice work equally for all, and the criminal justice system is not simply apipeline from underfunded schools to overcrowded jails, it requires vigilance.
And we'll suffer the occasional setback.  But we will win these fights.  This country haschanged too much.  People of goodwill, regardless of party, are too plentiful for those with illwill to change history’s currents.
In some ways, though, the securing of civil rights, voting rights, the eradication of legalizeddiscrimination -- the very significance of these victories may have obscured a second goal ofthe March.  For the men and women who gathered 50 years ago were not there in search ofsome abstract ideal.  They were there seeking jobs as well as justice -- not just the absence ofoppression but the presence of economic opportunity.
  
For what does it profit a man, Dr. King would ask, to sit at an integrated lunch counter if hecan’t afford the meal?  This idea -- that one’s liberty is linked to one’s livelihood; that thepursuit of happiness requires the dignity of work, the skills to find work, decent pay, somemeasure of material security -- this idea was not new.  Lincoln himself understood theDeclaration of Independence in such terms -- as a promise that in due time, “the weightsshould be lifted from the shoulders of all men, and that all should have an equal chance.”  
And Dr. King explained that the goals of African Americans were identical to working people ofall races:  “Decent wages, fair working conditions, livable housing, old-age security, healthand welfare measures, conditions in which families can grow, have education for theirchildren, and respect in the community.”
What King was describing has been the dream of every American.  It's what's lured forcenturies new arrivals to our shores.  And it’s along this second dimension -- of economicopportunity, the chance through honest toil to advance one’s station in life -- where the goalsof 50 years ago have fallen most short. 
Yes, there have been examples of success within black America that would have beenunimaginable a half century ago.  But as has already been noted, black unemployment hasremained almost twice as high as white unemployment, Latino unemployment close behind. The gap in wealth between races has not lessened, it's grown.  And as President Clintonindicated, the position of all working Americans, regardless of color, has eroded, making thedream Dr. King described even more elusive. 
For over a decade, working Americans of all races have seen their wages and incomesstagnate, even as corporate profits soar, even as the pay of a fortunate few explodes. Inequality has steadily risen over the decades.  Upward mobility has become harder.  In toomany communities across this country, in cities and suburbs and rural hamlets, the shadow ofpoverty casts a pall over our youth, their lives a fortress of substandard schools anddiminished prospects, inadequate health care and perennial violence. 
And so as we mark this anniversary, we must remind ourselves that the measure of progressfor those who marched 50 years ago was not merely how many blacks could join the ranks ofmillionaires.  It was whether this country would admit all people who are willing to work hardregardless of race into the ranks of a middle-class life.
The test was not, and never has been, whether the doors of opportunity are cracked a bitwider for a few.  It was whether our economic system provides a fair shot for the many -- forthe black custodian and the white steelworker, the immigrant dishwasher and the NativeAmerican veteran.  To win that battle, to answer that call -- this remains our great unfinishedbusiness. 
  
We shouldn’t fool ourselves.  The task will not be easy.  Since 1963, the economy haschanged.  The twin forces of technology and global competition have subtracted those jobsthat once provided a foothold into the middle class -- reduced the bargaining power ofAmerican workers.  And our politics has suffered.  Entrenched interests, those who benefitfrom an unjust status quo, resisted any government efforts to give working families a fair deal-- marshaling an army of lobbyists and opinion makers to argue that minimum wage increasesor stronger labor laws or taxes on the wealthy who could afford it just to fund crumblingschools, that all these things violated sound economic principles.  We'd be told that growinginequality was a price for a growing economy, a measure of this free market; that greed wasgood and compassion ineffective, and those without jobs or health care had only themselvesto blame.
And then, there were those elected officials who found it useful to practice the old politics ofdivision, doing their best to convince middle-class Americans of a great untruth -- thatgovernment was somehow itself to blame for their growing economic insecurity; that distantbureaucrats were taking their hard-earned dollars to benefit the welfare cheat or the illegalimmigrant.
And then, if we're honest with ourselves, we'll admit that during the course of 50 years, therewere times when some of us claiming to push for change lost our way.  The anguish ofassassinations set off self-defeating riots.  Legitimate grievances against police brutalitytipped into excuse-making for criminal behavior.  Racial politics could cut both ways, as thetransformative message of unity and brotherhood was drowned out by the language ofrecrimination.  And what had once been a call for equality of opportunity, the chance for allAmericans to work hard and get ahead was too often framed as a mere desire for governmentsupport -- as if we had no agency in our own liberation, as if poverty was an excuse for notraising your child, and the bigotry of others was reason to give up on yourself.
All of that history is how progress stalled.  That's how hope was diverted.  It's how ourcountry remained divided.  But the good news is, just as was true in 1963, we now have achoice. We can continue down our current path, in which the gears of this great democracygrind to a halt and our children accept a life of lower expectations; where politics is a zero-
sum game where a few do very well while struggling families of every race fight over ashrinking economic pie -- that’s one path.  Or we can have the courage to change. 
The March on Washington teaches us that we are not trapped by the mistakes of history; thatwe are masters of our fate.  But it also teaches us that the promise of this nation will only bekept when we work together.  We’ll have to reignite the embers of empathy and fellow feeling,the coalition of conscience that found expression in this place 50 years ago. 
And I believe that spirit is there, that truth force inside each of us.  I see it when a whitemother recognizes her own daughter in the face of a poor black child.  I see it when the blackyouth thinks of his own grandfather in the dignified steps of an elderly white man.
  
It’s there when the native-born recognizing that striving spirit of the new immigrant; when theinterracial couple connects the pain of a gay couple who are discriminated against andunderstands it as their own. 
That’s where courage comes from -- when we turn not from each other, or on each other, buttowards one another, and we find that we do not walk alone.  That’s where courage comesfrom.
And with that courage, we can stand together for good jobs and just wages.  With thatcourage, we can stand together for the right to health care in the richest nation on Earth forevery person.  With that courage, we can stand together for the right of every child, from thecorners of Anacostia to the hills of Appalachia, to get an education that stirs the mind andcaptures the spirit, and prepares them for the world that awaits them.
With that courage, we can feed the hungry, and house the homeless, and transform bleakwastelands of poverty into fields of commerce and promise.
America, I know the road will be long, but I know we can get there.  Yes, we will stumble, butI know we’ll get back up.  That’s how a movement happens.  That’s how history bends.  That'show when somebody is faint of heart, somebody else brings them along and says, come on,we’re marching.
There’s a reason why so many who marched that day, and in the days to come, were young --for the young are unconstrained by habits of fear, unconstrained by the conventions of whatis.  They dared to dream differently, to imagine something better.  And I am convinced thatsame imagination, the same hunger of purpose stirs in this generation.
We might not face the same dangers of 1963, but the fierce urgency of now remains.  Wemay never duplicate the swelling crowds and dazzling procession of that day so long ago -- noone can match King’s brilliance -- but the same flame that lit the heart of all who are willing totake a first step for justice, I know that flame remains.
That tireless teacher who gets to class early and stays late and dips into her own pocket tobuy supplies because she believes that every child is her charge -- she’s marching.
That successful businessman who doesn't have to but pays his workers a fair wage and thenoffers a shot to a man, maybe an ex-con who is down on his luck -- he’s marching.
The mother who pours her love into her daughter so that she grows up with the confidence towalk through the same door as anybody’s son -- she’s marching.
  
The father who realizes the most important job he’ll ever have is raising his boy right, even ifhe didn't have a father -- especially if he didn't have a father at home -- he’s marching.
The battle-scarred veterans who devote themselves not only to helping their fellow warriorsstand again, and walk again, and run again, but to keep serving their country when they comehome -- they are marching.
Everyone who realizes what those glorious patriots knew on that day -- that change does notcome from Washington, but to Washington; that change has always been built on ourwillingness, We The People, to take on the mantle of citizenship -- you are marching.
And that’s the lesson of our past.  That's the promise of tomorrow -- that in the face ofimpossible odds, people who love their country can change it.  That when millions ofAmericans of every race and every region, every faith and every station, can join together in aspirit of brotherhood, then those mountains will be made low, and those rough places will bemade plain, and those crooked places, they straighten out towards grace, and we willvindicate the faith of those who sacrificed so much and live up to the true meaning of ourcreed, as one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
