President Obama: I thought it was a slow day, so I’ve --
Question:  Slow news day, huh?
President Obama:  -- bring the other guy in.
Obviously, there’s a big debate going on about taxes, and about the need to grow theeconomy and to create jobs.  And just about every day this week, I’ve been making anargument as to why the agreement that we’ve struck to provide billions of dollars in payrolltax cuts that can immediately help rejuvenate the economy, as well as tax cuts for middle-
class families, unemployment insurance for folks who desperately need it, credits for college,Child Tax Credits, as well as a range of business investments credits are so important to makesure that we keep this recovery moving.
I just had a terrific meeting with the former President, President Bill Clinton.  And we justhappened to have this as a topic of conversation.  And I thought, given the fact that hepresided over as good an economy as we’ve seen in our lifetimes, that it might be useful forhim to share some of his thoughts.
  
I’m going to let him speak very briefly.  And then I’ve actually got to go over and do some --just one more Christmas party.  So he may decide he wants to take some questions, but Iwant to make sure that you guys hear it from him directly.
Former President Clinton:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  First of all, I feel awkwardbeing here, and now you’re going to leave me all by myself. Let me just say a couple ofthings.  First of all, I still spend about an hour a day trying to study this economy.  And I’mnot running for anything, and I don’t have a political agenda.  I just -- I try to figure out whatto do.
I have reviewed this agreement that the President reached with Republican leaders.  And Iwant to make full disclosure I make quite a bit of money now, so the position that theRepublicans have urged will personally benefit me.  And on its own, I wouldn’t support itbecause I don’t think that my tax cut is the most economically efficient way to get theeconomy going again.  But I don’t want to be in the dark about the fact that I will receive thecontinuation of the tax rates.
However, the agreement taken as a whole is, I believe, the best bipartisan agreement we canreach to help the largest number of Americans, and to maximize the chances that theeconomic recovery will accelerate and create more jobs, and to minimize the chances that itwill slip back, which is what has happened in other financial collapses.  Like, that’s what Japanfaced, and it’s something that we have to avoid in America.
Why do I say that?  First of all, because clearly the extension of unemployment, which givespeople a percentage of the income they were previously making, will -- that money will bespent and it will bolster the economy for the next couple of years.
Secondly, the conversion of the Make Work Pay Tax Credit, which the President passed before,which goes to -- went to 95 percent of the American people, converting that into an $120billion one-year payroll tax relief act is, according to all the economic analyses, the singlemost effective tax cut you can do to support economic activity.  This will actually create a fairnumber of jobs.  I expect it to lower the unemployment rate and keep us going.
Thirdly, and one thing I haven’t seen much about in the reports, this agreement will reallyhelp America over the long term, because it continues the credits for manufacturing jobsrelated to energy coming in to America.  And I’ll remind you, just in the last two years, therehave been 30 high-powered battery factories either opened or presently being built inAmerica, taking us from 2 to 20 percent of the world’s share of that.  And we’re going toprobably be at 40 percent by 2014.  This is a really important thing, bringing manufacturingback to America, because it’s a huge multiplier to create new jobs.
So in my opinion, this is a good bill.  And I hope that my fellow Democrats will support it.  Ithank the Republican leaders for agreeing to include things that were important to thePresident.
  
There is never a perfect bipartisan bill in the eyes of a partisan.  And we all see thisdifferently.  But I really believe this will be a significant net-plus for the country.  I also thinkthat in general a lot of people are heaving a sigh of relief that there’s finally been someagreement on something.
But don't minimize the impact of the unemployment relief for working families, of the payrolltax relief, and of the continuation of the incentives to grow jobs, which will trigger more creditcoming out of the banks.
Keep in mind, ultimately the long-term answer here is to get the $2 trillion, which banks nowhave in cash reserves uncommitted to loans, out there in the economy again, the $1.8 trillionin corporate treasuries not now being invested out there in the economy again.  I think this isa net-plus.
And you know how I feel.  I think the people that benefit most should pay most.  That'salways been my position -- not for class warfare reasons; for reasons of fairness in rebuildingthe middle class in America.  But we have the distribution of authority we have now in theCongress and what we’re going to have in January, and I think this is a much, much betteragreement than would be reached were we to wait until January.  And I think it will have amuch more positive impact on the economy.
So for whatever it’s worth, that's what I think.
President Obama:  That’s worth a lot.
Former President Clinton:  I would like to say one other thing on another subject, just to berecorded on the record.  They don't need my support on this because we have some goodRepublican support, including the first President Bush.  I think this START agreement is veryimportant to the future of our national security.
And it is not a radical agreement.  Boris Yeltsin and I agreed in principle on this samereduction, and there was no way in the wide world he could get it through the Russian Dumathat existed at the time in his second term.  So we didn't proceed because it couldn’t beratified there.  I’m not sure the Senate would have ratified it then, but I think they will notwith enough encouragement.
But the cooperation that we will get from the Russians, and the signal that will be sent to theworld on nonproliferation, when all these other things are going on which threaten to increasenuclear proliferation, is very important.  One of the things you know is that when people foolwith these weapons, they're expensive to build, expensive to maintain, and expensive tosecure the material that goes into making the weapons.
  
This is something that is profoundly important.  This ought to be way beyond party.  They’veworked very hard.  They’ve worked out, in my opinion, the details.  And I hope it will beratified.
Question:  Mr. President.
Former President Clinton:  Yes.
Question:  First of all, a lot of Democrats on Capitol Hill say this is a bad deal; that PresidentObama could have gotten more.  What’s your message to them?  And then if I could also justask -- well, go ahead.  You can answer --
Former President Clinton:  First, my message is, I don't believe that's true because inJanuary, they will be in the majority.  And this would dramatically reduce their incentive toextend unemployment benefits, to support the conversion of the Make Work Pay tax creditsPresident Obama enacted into this payroll tax deduction, which as I said, I read all theseeconomic studies.  Every single, unbiased, economic study says the best thing you can do ifyou’re going to take a tax-cut path to grow the economy is to give payroll tax relief.
I just got back from a trip to Asia with my foundation.  Hong Kong, super free-market place,had a stimulus.  Well, I guess we’re not supposed to use that word any more.  You know whatthey did?  They gave almost 10 percent of the people -- low-income, working people -- twomonths free rent in public housing.  They gave some money to the seniors.  But the mostimportant thing they did was payroll tax relief for a year.
This is -- all the people who study this believe it’s the number one thing, so I don't believethey can get a better deal by waiting.
And I think the other thing that nobody is talking about, but I’m telling you it’s important, Ilive out there now, and I do a lot of this energy work, these tax credits have made uscompetitive again.
I didn't see a single story that credited Senator Reid’s election with the fact that with threeweeks before the election, two new plants were announced in Nevada, which has the highestunemployment rate in the state, a thousand people making LED lights, a thousand peoplemaking wind turbines for that big wind farm in Texas, both companies owned by Chineseinterests who said in no uncertain terms we’re here because you decided to compete with usfor the future, and you gave us tax credits so we can pay higher labor costs because we savethe transportation costs because of these credits.  I don't believe there is a better deal outthere.
Question:  And then as a follow-up, you mentioned the Republican Congress taking office inJanuary.  What was your advice to President Obama today about how to deal with theCongress from the opposition party?
  
Former President Clinton:  I have a general rule which is that whatever he asked me aboutmy advice, and whatever I say should become public only if he decides to make it public.  Hecan say whatever he wants, but --
Question:  What do you think?
President Obama:  Here’s what I’ll say, is I’ve been keeping the First Lady waiting for abouthalf an hour, so I’m going to take off, but --
Former President Clinton:  I don't want to make her mad, please go.
President Obama:  You’re in good hands, and Gibbs will call last question.
Former President Clinton:  Yes, help me.  Thank you. Yes, go ahead.
Question:  Mr. President, is there anything else that can be done in your opinion to loosen upthe private credit markets that have been so tight?  I mean if people can’t get their hands oncapital, how can they be the entrepreneurs that they want to be?  And this is something thatthe Republicans have fought all along.  What’s the next step?
Former President Clinton:  First of all, let me just run through the numbers again.  We’renot talking about high-risk stuff.  That's what the financial regulation bill tries to stop andcharges the federal regulators with -- even if the Wall Street banks get -- we all know theyhave to be able to have more leverage than the traditional community banks tend to want upin the Dakotas or Arkansas or anyplace else.
But let’s start with the community banks.  If they loan money conservatively, they can loan$10 for every dollar they have in the bank.  If they have $2 trillion uncommitted to loans,even though some of them may have a few mortgage issues unresolved, most of thatmortgage debt has been off-loaded to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac or has vanished into cyber-
sphere with those securitized subprime mortgages.  I don't like the securities, but theyhappened.
  
So what I believe is going on is, first of all, the business community has not come forward asaggressively -- the small business community.  And this bill did preserve all those smallbusiness incentives that were enacted by the Congress in the previous two years.  There arelike 16 different measures that give incentives for small businesses to take loans and loanguarantees and that kind of thing.
It appears to me that the community banks, at least, are somewhat uncertain about how thefinancial reform bill, which I supported, applies to them and what the costs of compliancemight be.  You remember, the two big things that bill did was to require the federal regulatorsto monitor every month the big banks that caused the meltdown and to require them to setaside more capital.
And then it set up an orderly bankruptcy mechanism and banned future bailouts.  It said --that bill actually says:  If this happens again, the shareholders and the executives have to eatit.
But there’s a whole lot of other things in credit cards and other matters that deal with it.  Ithink it is really, really important just to do an aggressive, 100 percent information drench.  Imean I would go so far as to do it bank by bank by bank by bank so that everybody knowsexactly what they have to do, exactly what it costs and how quickly this can all be resolved.
And then I think it’s important to make sure that all these community banks and the peoplewho might borrow from them understand where the small businesses of America are andwhere the manufacturers are with the various loan guarantees and credits and deductions thatare available under these laws.
I still think -- you know, we too often assume that when a law passes, people know it passed,and they know what’s in it, and they know how it applies to them.  That may not be true inthis case because there’s been so much activity and so much debate about it that was adebate that occurred in the context of a campaign rather than in the context of, “Let me tellyou how this works, come here, let’s figure out how to get you a loan.”  So in my opinion,that's what needs to be done over the next two or three months.
The money is there to get this country out of this mess.  Two trillion dollars in the bank is $20trillion in loans.  Now, there’s not that much guaranteed, but there’s plenty.
And I also believe the same thing with big companies.  We should analyze the situation ofevery company that at a minimum has got a $1 billion or more in cash and ask them to behonest with us about what would it take to get you back in the investment business.
These companies clearly have a preference for reinvesting in America, or they’d have put thismoney somewhere else already.  They have got -- it’s an amazing thing, $1.8 trillion incorporate treasuries, 6.2 percent of their capitalized value.  It’s been since 1964 that they hadthose kind of cash balances relative to their value.
  
So those are the things that I think we have to do now, so I can’t answer your question,except the bankers I talked to in Arkansas, in small places that I visit around where I live inNew York, they all say, we know we need to ramp up the activity.  We got to get the greenlight about how we’re going to comply with these laws, and then we’ll go.
And you might be able to actually use your program to do it.  You might be able to bring somecommunity bankers on, bring some regulars on, work through this stuff for people.  I justthink they don't know yet.
Yes.
Question:  Some of your fellow Democrats are saying that the President just didn't go in andfight hard enough for his core principles; that he caved in.  Politically, some say that heshould be a one-term President.  Has he damaged not only his own political path, but has helet the party down?
Former President Clinton:  I don't believe so.  I think -- I just respectfully disagree aboutthat.  I think that a lot of -- look, a lot of them are hurting now.  And I get it.  And you know Idid 133 events for them.  I believe the Congress in the last two years did a far better job thanthe American people thought they did, at least the American people that voted in themidterms.
And I went to extraordinary efforts to try to explain what I thought had been done in the waysthat I thought were most favorable to them.  But we had an election.  The results are whatthey are.  The numbers will only get worse in January in terms of negotiating.
And the President -- look, if we had 5 percent growth and unemployment was dropping like arock, maybe you could have a so-called Mexican standoff, and you could say, it will be you,not me, the voters will hold responsible for raising taxes on middle-class people if they all godown next year.  That is not the circumstance we face.
The United States has suffered a severe financial collapse.  These things take longer to getover than normal recessions.  We must first make sure we keep getting over it.  We don’twant to slip back down as Japan did.
And in order to make it happen over the long run, that’s why the question I was just asked isso good, is we have to go beyond direct investments, whether they’re stimulus projects or taxcuts, to private growth.  But to get there, we have to achieve a higher level of growth thattriggers a confidence.  So I personally believe this is a good deal and the best he could havegotten under the circumstances. I just disagree.  I understand why -- people have a right todisagree with him.  But I disagree.
Yes, sir.
  
Question:  Mr. President, you’ve made a number of very effective calls for the health careplan last year.  Have you been asked to make any calls to Democratic members on the taxdeal? And, secondly, there are a lot of comparisons being made between the ’94 election andthe 2010 election.  Do you think those are analogous?  Are they similar situations?
Former President Clinton:  It’s like all these things -- all of you will be under enormouspressure to develop a storyline.  And there are some parallels, and some that are different. And you know, I’m -- I’ll let you do that.  I’m out of politics now, except to say that I careabout my country and I want to get this economy going again.
And I believe that it is necessary for these parties to work together.  And I think, for example,the storyline is how well we work with the Republicans and all that.  But we’ve played politicalkabuki for a year, had two government shutdowns.  We can’t afford that now.  The onlyreason we could do that is if the deficit was already coming down in a time when interest rateswere the problem, and the economy was coming out.  People just didn’t feel it yet in ’94.
We can’t afford that.  We have got to pull together.  And both sides are going to have to eatsome things they don’t like, because we cannot afford to have the kind of impasse that wehad last time over a long period of time.  We don’t want to slip back into a recession.  We gotto keep this thing going and accelerate its pace.  I think this is the best available option.
Mark.
Question:  -- any calls --
Question:  Mr. President --
Former President Clinton:  Oh, I’m sorry, George, I have not.  But in fairness, as soon asthe election was over, I took my foundation trip to Asia.  Then I came back -- I just got backfrom the West Coast, doing my annual trip out there.  There are people that support the workI do and my foundation.  I flew overnight to get here today.  And I have to leave againtonight. If I were asked to, I would be happy to talk to anyone.  But I have not been asked. But, in fairness, the President didn’t have a chance to.  He asked me to come down today,because he knew I was going to -- Hillary and I were appearing before the Brookings SabanForum on the Middle East tonight.
Yes, Mark.
Question:  Mr. President, I get the feeling that you’re happier to be here commenting andgiving advice than governing.
  
Former President Clinton:  Oh, I had quite a good time governing. I am happy to be here, Isuppose, when the bullets that are fired are unlikely to hit me, unless they’re just ricocheting.No, I’m glad to be here because I think the President made a good decision and because Iwant my country to do well.  And after the ’94 election, I said the American people, in theirinfinite wisdom, have put us both in the same boat.  So we’re going to either row or sink.  AndI want us to row.
Question:  Can you give us a Haiti update?
Former President Clinton:  What?
Question:  Can you give us a Haiti update?  I know you were there.
Former President Clinton:  Yes.  I had a long talk with the Prime Minister today.  And he,first of all, has done I think a remarkable job of being a loyal prime minister, but not beinginvolved in the political imbroglio that’s going on, except to try to keep calm.
There was a decision made by the electoral council to review the vote in its entirety and to asksome outside observers to come in who are not only credible but knowledgeable.  And theywill announce exactly how they propose to do that.  Today was a pretty calm day.  And theyexpect the weekend to be pretty calm.
We are going to have our commission meeting next week.  We may move it to the DominicanRepublic.  But I think the best thing that we can do for the people of Haiti is to prove thatHaitians on the commission, and the donors, are still committed to the long-termreconstruction process, whoever gets elected president.
The best thing they can do is -- everyone understands they had to carry out this electionunder enormously difficult circumstances.  Even getting the ID cards to everybody, as youknow, proved difficult, because they were in those tented areas.
But what I can say is it was calmer today.  It appears they are going to try to have a recountprocedure, which they hope will acquire more support from across the political spectrum. And, meanwhile, we want the commission to keep working.
The World Bank just released about $70 billion of the $90 billion in projects we approved fourmonths ago.  So that will go in.  We’ll be hiring more people immediately on those projects. And we’re going to approve a lot more projects on the 14th.  And that’s my focus now.
Yes.
  
Question:  Mr. President, I have to ask, do you think your appearance here today will helpsway votes where they’re needed the most right now, among House Democrats?
Former President Clinton:  I have no idea.
Question:  The reason I ask you that is because a lot of them are sort of antsy.  And I knowyou never used the term back in your first term, but they’re antsy about the precedent oftriangulation.  They’re still smarting over that.  And your appearance here today might notnecessarily push them in the direction that the President wants them to be pushed.
Former President Clinton:  That’s right, it may not.  But I would like to -- you know, I toldPresident Obama, and I’ll tell you, you ought to go back and read a lecture that FranklinRoosevelt gave in 1926 before he was the Vice Presidential nominee, before he came downwith polio, to his old alma mater [inaudible], in which he discussed the dilemma of theprogressive movement in American politics.
I have an enormous amount of respect for the Democrats in the House.  And I’ve already toldyou I regret that so many of them lost.  I think some of our best people lost.  And I get wherethey’re coming from.
I can only tell you that my economic analysis is that given all the alternatives that I canimagine actually becoming law, this is the best economic result for America.  And I think it isenormous relief for America to think that both parties might vote for something, anything thatthey could both agree on.  And there is no way you can have a compromise without havingsomething in the bill that you don’t like.
So I don’t know if I can influence anybody.  Heck, I couldn’t -- you know, I’d go some placesand the people I campaigned for won.  In some places, the people I campaigned for lost.  Idon’t know.  All I can tell you is what I think.
Question:  Considering your credibility on the deficit, what do you think about concerns aboutthe short-term deficit and the long-term deficit, and where our country is going?
Former President Clinton:  I’m happy to address that because I don’t think that -- I don’tthink I did a good enough job in this election season, obviously, and I’m not sure we did.
The difference between now and when I became President, when we immediately went afterthe deficit, is quite simple.  When I became President, it was after 12 years in which theaccumulative debt of the country had risen from $1 to $4 trillion.  It was the first period inAmerican history when we had ever run structural deficits of any size. And so we were havingto pay too much for money.  It was costing us a lot to borrow money in the public sector,taking I think it was 14 cents of every dollar on the debt at the time.  And it was crowding outthe opportunity of the private sector to borrow money, and raising their cost.  And that’ssparked the recession that we had in the early ‘90s.
  
What happened this time was totally different.  This time there was a collapse of a financialsystem, which took interest rates to zero.  Now, I know there’s a lot of alarm now.  Peoplesay, oh, the interest rates went up on bond and in debt in the last couple of days.  And theysaid, oh, is it because of the increase in the -- increasing the deficit in the short term?  Is itbecause of the economy growing?  That doesn’t bother me.  We have to get out of deflation. The biggest problem we have now is deflation.
So, look, I’m a Depression-era kid.  I don’t like deficits ever, really.  We had four surpluseswhen I was President.  That’s what I like.  I like balanced budgets and surpluses; when youhave growth.
But if I were in office now, I would have done what the President has done.  You have to firstput the brakes on a contracting economy.  And then you have to somehow hold it togetheruntil growth resumes.  When growth resumes, you have to have interest rates higher thanzero.
So you should actually -- now, if they get too high, you’ll be alarmed.  But you should beencouraged that interest rates are beginning to creep up again.  It’s the sign of a healthyeconomy, and the idea that there would be competition for money.
I do believe that we’ll have to take aggressive and disciplined action to eliminate thestructural deficit again.  And I think it was a mistake to go back to structural deficits.  I thinkif America were out of debt on a normal basis, and we didn’t have to borrow money from ourmajor trading partners, we would have more economic freedom and economic security.  So Iwant to see what comes out of this, but I expect to support some very vigorous actions toeliminate the deficit and get us back to balance.
Yes, one more.  I’ve got to get out of here.  Go ahead.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Beyond this pending tax deal, there are enormousissues of importance that are unfinished, from education to energy, the deficit.  And this is stilla very dividing country.  Do you think the American people want a President to compromisewith the opposing party?  And is that a message that you think Democrats are going to haveto accept?
Former President Clinton:  Yes, but I also believe that it’s a message Republicans are goingto have to accept.  Keep in mind that many of the -- the really interesting thing was -- is thata lot of the hardcore conservatives think the Republicans gave too much.  Read CharlesKrauthammer’s column in the Post today.  He’s a brilliant man, and he pointed out that theygot the divisive tax cuts, but most of them were targeted to middle-class working people --that's what the payroll tax cut is -- that the unemployment benefits were extended, whichsome of them did not want to do, and that the American people, by two to one, support themboth.
  
So there are some conservatives who don't believe in the economic theory I just advanced toyou; who believe that the President and Democrats got more out of this than the Republicansdid. So I think that's healthy, too, because everybody has got to give a little.
Yes, I think the one thing that always happens when you have divided government is thatpeople no longer see principled compromise as weakness.  This system was set up to promoteprincipled compromise.  It is an ethical thing to do.  In a democracy where no one is adictator, we would all be at each other’s throats all the time, and we would be in a state ofconstant paralysis if once power is divided, there is no compromise.
Question:  What’s the political fight worth having?  What would you tell Democrats thepolitical fight worth having is right now?
Former President Clinton:  Well, I think it’s worth fighting against the repeal of the healthcare law.  I would be in favor -- and I can give you four or five things off the top of my head Ithink should be done to improve it.
I think it’s worth a ferocious fight to avoid repeal of the student loan reform, which I believe isthe best chance we’ve got to take America back to number one from number nine in thepercent of adults in the world with four-year college degrees.
I think it’s worth fighting against repeal of the financial reform and the assurance it gives usthat we won’t have another meltdown, and if we do, there won’t be another bailout.
I think there are a lot of fights worth having, and I presume the Republicans want to fightthose, too, since they ran on that.  And they’ll be able to have these differences.  But thisholds the promise that after the fights are over, we’ll be able to find principled compromiseson those areas, as well.  And to me that's worth doing.
But first, the economy first.  We can’t go back into a recession.  We have to keep crawling outof this mess we’re in.  And this is a good first step, both on the substantive merits and on thepsychological relief it gives to the American people in general, and the small business peopleand community bankers and others who can start doing things that will help get better inparticular.
Thank you.
