Good afternoon, everybody. Today I want to start by addressing three issues, and then I'lltake your questions.       First, I'd like to say a few words about the situation in Iran. The United States and theinternational community have been appalled and outraged by the threats, the beatings, andimprisonments of the last few days. I strongly condemn these unjust actions, and I join withthe American people in mourning each and every innocent life that is lost.
I've made it clear that the United States respects the sovereignty of the Islamic Republic ofIran, and is not interfering with Iran's affairs. But we must also bear witness to the courageand the dignity of the Iranian people, and to a remarkable opening within Iranian society. Andwe deplore the violence against innocent civilians anywhere that it takes place.
The Iranian people are trying to have a debate about their future. Some in Iran -- Some in theIranian government, in particular, are trying to avoid that debate by accusing the UnitedStates and others in the West of instigating protests over the election. These accusations arepatently false. They're an obvious attempt to distract people from what is truly taking placewithin Iran's borders. This tired strategy of using old tensions to scapegoat other countrieswon't work anymore in Iran. This is not about the United States or the West; this is about thepeople of Iran, and the future that they -- and only they -- will choose. The Iranian people canspeak for themselves. That's precisely what's happened in the last few days.

In 2009, no iron fist is strong enough to shut off the world from bearing witness to peacefulprotests of justice. Despite the Iranian government's efforts to expel journalists and isolateitself, powerful images and poignant words have made their way to us through cell phonesand computers, and so we've watched what the Iranian people are doing.
This is what we've witnessed.
We've seen the timeless dignity of tens of thousands of Iranians marching in silence. We'veseen people of all ages risk everything to insist that their votes are counted and that theirvoices are heard. Above all, we've seen courageous women stand up to the brutality andthreats, and we've experienced the searing image of a woman bleeding to death on thestreets. While this loss is raw and extraordinarily painful, we also know this: Those who standup for justice are always on the right side of history.
As I said in Cairo, suppressing ideas never succeeds in making them go away. The Iranianpeople have a universal right to assembly and free speech. If the Iranian government seeksthe respect of the international community, it must respect those rights and heed the will ofits own people. It must govern through consent and not coercion. That's what Iran's ownpeople are calling for, and the Iranian people will ultimately judge the actions of their owngovernment.