Forty-five years ago -- in June of 1970 -- a telegram arrived in upstate New York at the homeof 18-year-old Marty Dempsey.  “Congratulations,” it read, “You are appointed to the WestPoint Class of 1974…”  Marty was honored.  But he had just finished high school, and hewasn’t entirely sure he wanted to head off to the Academy.  His mother, I’m told, thoughtdifferent.  She urged him to “give it a try for the summer” -- which sounds like Beast Barracksmeets sleep-away camp.   Sound advice, with a little Irish charm, runs in the Dempsey family.
Over the decades that followed, he patrolled the Iron Curtain, commanded divisions on desertbattlefields, and led America’s soldiers -- and more than a few times, he burst into song.  Andover these last four years, Marty’s wisdom, his vision, and his character have helped lead thegreatest fighting force the world has ever known.  
Secretary Carter, Deputy Secretary Work, members of Congress and the Joint Chiefs, servicesecretaries, men and women of the Defense Department, our armed forces and our militaryfamilies -- it is a deep honor to join you as we pay tribute to a singular leader for our militaryand our nation, and one of the finest men that I know -- General Martin Dempsey.
A little over four years ago, I tapped Marty to serve as Chief of Staff of the Army.  We let himenjoy it -- for one day. Then, I asked him to be Chairman.  So let me just say, Marty, andmore importantly, Deanie, this time I promise, no surprises tomorrow.    
  
I chose Marty for these leadership roles because of his moral fiber and his deep commitmentto American strength and values.  I chose him because of his vision for our military as a moreversatile and responsive force.  I chose him because he had the steady hand we needed inthis moment of transition -- as we tackle emerging threats and support so many of our troopsas they transition to civilian life.  And I’ve seen Marty manage each of these challenges withintegrity and foresight and care.  But perhaps most of all, I chose Marty because he’s a leaderyou can trust.  
Marty, you’ve always given it to me straight.  I can't tell you how much I've appreciated yourcandor and your counsel.  And I’ve seen you build that trust not just with me, but across ourmilitary, with our troops and their families, with Congress and our allies abroad, and with theAmerican people.  
Today, thanks in no small measure to Marty’s leadership, America has reassured allies fromEurope to the Asia Pacific.  We ended our combat mission in Afghanistan and broughtAmerica’s longest war to a responsible end.  We’ve forged new partnerships from South Asiato the Sahel to meet terrorist threats.  We’ve built a coalition that is combating ISIL in Iraqand Syria.  We have bolstered our cyber defenses.  We helped halt the spread of Ebola inWest Africa. 
None of this would have been possible without Marty’s guidance and leadership.  And whatmakes it more remarkable is that he’s guided our forces through a time of reckless budgetcuts.  With less than a week before Congress needs to pass a budget to keep the governmentopen, let me just say now is not the time for games that lock in sequester.  It’s not good forour military readiness.  It’s not good for our troops.  It's not good for our family.  And it's notgood for our country.  As Commander in Chief, I believe we should invest in America and inour national security, and not shortchange it. 
Yet, even in these tough fiscal times, Marty has made sure we maintain our militarysuperiority.  And no one can match our services because no one can match our servicemembers -- our sons and daughters who he’s cared for like his own.  In them, he sees theWest Point classmates of his youth.  He sees those he commanded.  He sees their families --and, in them, he sees his own.
There’s Deanie, of course, Marty’s high school sweetheart, lifelong better half, whose graceand resilience and good cheer embodies the military spouses she fights so fiercely for.  Chris,Megan, and Caitlin -- who followed in their father’s footsteps to wear our nation’s cloth. Marty’s mother, Sarah, who we thank for making him give the military a try “for thesummer.”   And there are his nine grandchildren, who we can be confident will mark thisnation in so many positive ways in the future.  On behalf of the American people, I want tothank the entire Dempsey family for their service to our nation. 
  
Marty will be the first to tell you that he couldn’t have done his job without his outstandingVice Chair.  And I, too, have depended on the advice and experience of Admiral SandyWinnefeld.  Thank you, Sandy, for your outstanding service. 
In General Joe Dunford and General Paul Selva -- two of the most respected officers in ourmilitary -- we have tested leaders ready to carry on Marty and Sandy’s work.  I could not beprouder of them and the service they’ve already rendered this great nation.  And I could notbe more confident in the advice and counsel that they’ll provide me.  Thank you to them. Thank you, Ellyn.  Thank you so much for everything that you’ve done.     
Now, we're going to have a lot of work to do long after not just Marty is gone, but I'm gonefrom the stage.  There are always new threats, there are always new challenges in this ever-
changing world.  We have to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, the remnants of al Qaeda,terror networks around the world.  We have to adapt our defenses for the 21st century.  Wehave to give our troops the support they need to meet their missions.  We have to make surethat our forces and our families receive the pay and the benefits and the quality of life thatthey have earned.  That is how we maintain a military that is second to none.  And I amconfident that we are up to the task.  
I’m told that on Marty’s desk there’s a box -- it’s a cigar box with 132 cards, each one withthe name, picture and story of every one of the 132 soldiers who gave their lives under hiscommand in Iraq.  And on top of the box are three words:  “Make It Matter.”  Make it matter. And every morning, Marty places three of those cards in his pocket, so that every moment asChairman -- every meeting, every trip, every decision, every troop review -- every moment ofevery day some of those fallen heroes are with him.  
Those cards were with him a few years back when, for the first time as Chairman, Martyspoke to a group of military children who had lost a parent.  And that day, as he walkedthrough the crowd -- some 600 Gold Star kids, young, so full of hope -- he began to thinkabout their lives and how each of them would have to make their way without a father or amother.  And Marty had planned to speak -- but he couldn’t.  So he did one of the things thathe does best.  He began to sing.
And in that moment, the highest-ranking military leader in our nation forged a bond withthose children -- boys and girls who, at such a tender age, had given up so much -- in a waythat perhaps nobody else could. And year after year, they’ve invited him back, because theyknow Marty Dempsey will always give them everything he has -- his voice, but even more, hisfull heart and soul.  
This is the man we honor today.  A friend to so many troops and families across our military. A patriot with a profound love for our country and those who sacrifice for it.  A trusted leaderwho in a time of great change “made it matter” all the time.
  
I am extraordinarily grateful to have had him by my side through the bulk of my presidency,and I am extraordinarily proud to call him my friend.  
Marty, for your lifetime of extraordinary service, you have the deepest thanks of a gratefulnation.  God bless you.  And God bless our men and women in uniform.
