To Chip, Kathy, and Nancy, who graciously shared your father with a nation that loved him; toWalter's friends, colleagues, protégés, and all who considered him a hero; to the men of theIntrepid; to all of you who are gathered here today; I am honored to be here to pay tribute tothe life and times of the man who chronicled our time.
I did not know Mr. Cronkite personally.  And my regret is made more acute by the stories thathave been shared here today. Nor, for that matter, did I know him any better than the tens ofmillions who turned to him each night in search of the answer to a simple question:  "Whathappened today?"  But like them and like all of you, I have benefited as a citizen from hisdogged pursuit of the truth, his passionate defense of objective reporting, and his view thatjournalism is more than just a profession; it is a public good vital to our democracy.
Even in his early career, Walter Cronkite resisted the temptation to get the story first in favorof getting it right.  He wanted to get it first, but he understood the importance of getting itright.  During one of his first jobs in Kansas City, Walter's program manager urged him to goon the air reporting a massive blaze -- and we just heard how much he loved fires -- amassive blaze at city hall that had already claimed lives.  When Walter reached for thetelephone, his boss asked, "What are you doing; get on the air!"  Walter replied that he wascalling the fire department to confirm the story.  "You don't need to confirm it," the managershouted, "My wife is watching the whole thing!"

Needless to say, Walter made the call, and even as the program manager took to the airhimself to broadcast the unfolding tragedy, Walter discovered that it had been nothing morethan a small fire that hadn't resulted in any injuries.  He lost his job -- but he got the storyright.
Walter wasn't afraid to rattle the high and the mighty, either; but he never dared tocompromise his integrity.  He got along with elected officials, even if they were wary of oneanother's motives.  One politician once remarked, "Walter, my friend, you've got to believeme, fully 85 percent of everything I told you today is the absolute truth."
He shared a complicated relationship with Presidents of both parties, who wanted him on theirside even as they were convinced that he wasn't.  President Johnson called Walter after theevening news from time to time to voice his displeasure over a certain story.  But Walter knewthat if he was receiving vociferous complaints from both sides, he must be doing his job.
His endless inquisitiveness about our world, I can imagine, came from a mother who soldencyclopedias for a living.  As a boy, Walter spent countless hours getting lost within theirpages, endlessly sidetracked by new and interesting entries that branched off from oneanother, fascinated by the world around us and how it worked.
And that's the way he lived his life -- with curiosity, exploring our planet, seeking to makesense of it and explaining it to others.  He went everywhere and he did everything.  He racedcars and boats; he traveled everywhere from the Amazon to the Arctic; he plunged 8,000 feetbelow the sea, trekked 18,000 feet up into the Himalayas, and experienced weightlessness inthe upper reaches of our atmosphere -- all with one mission:  to make it come alive for therest of us.
And as our world began to change, he helped us understand those changes.  He was foreverthere, reporting through world war and cold war; marches and milestones; scandal andsuccess; calmly and authoritatively telling us what we needed to know.  He was a voice ofcertainty in a world that was growing more and more uncertain.  And through it all, he neverlost the integrity or the plainspoken speaking style that he gained growing up in theheartland.  He was a familiar and welcome voice that spoke to each and every one of uspersonally.
So it may have seemed inevitable that he was named the most trusted man in America.  Buthere's the thing:  That title wasn't bestowed on him by a network.  We weren't told to believeit by some advertising campaign.  It was earned.  It was earned by year after year anddecade after decade of painstaking effort; a commitment to fundamental values; his beliefthat the American people were hungry for the truth, unvarnished and unaccompanied bytheatre or spectacle.  He didn't believe in dumbing down.  He trusted us.

When he was told of this extraordinary honor that he was the most trusted man in America,he naturally downplayed it by saying the people had not polled his wife.  When people of bothpolitical parties actually tried to recruit him to run for office, without even asking for hisstances on the issues, he said no -- to the relief of all potential opponents.  And when, even adecade and a half after his retirement, he still ranked first in seven of eight categories fortelevision journalists, he was disbelieving that he hadn't won the eighth category,"attractiveness."
Through all the events that came to define the 20th century, through all our moments ofdeepest hurt and brightest hope, Walter Cronkite was there, telling the story of the Americanage.
And this is how we remember him today.  But we also remember and celebrate the journalismthat Walter practiced -- a standard of honesty and integrity and responsibility to which somany of you have committed your careers.  It's a standard that's a little bit harder to findtoday.  We know that this is a difficult time for journalism.  Even as appetites for news andinformation grow, newsrooms are closing.  Despite the big stories of our era, seriousjournalists find themselves all too often without a beat. Just as the news cycle has shrunk, sohas the bottom line.
And too often, we fill that void with instant commentary and celebrity gossip and the softerstories that Walter disdained, rather than the hard news and investigative journalism hechampioned.  "What happened today?" is replaced with "Who won today?"  The public debatecheapens.  The public trust falters.  We fail to understand our world or one another as well aswe should –- and that has real consequences in our own lives and in the life of our nation.  Weseem stuck with a choice between what cuts to our bottom line and what harms us as asociety.  Which price is higher to pay?  Which cost is harder to bear?
"This democracy," Walter said, "cannot function without a reasonably well-informedelectorate."  That's why the honest, objective, meticulous reporting that so many of youpursue with the same zeal that Walter did is so vital to our democracy and our society:  Ourfuture depends on it. 
Walter was no naive idealist.  He understood the challenges and the pressures and thetemptations facing journalism in this new era.  He believed that a media company has anobligation to pursue a profit, but also an obligation to invest a good chunk of that profit backinto news and public affairs.  He was excited about all the stories that a high-tech world ofjournalism would be able to tell, and all the newly-emerging means with which to tell it.
Naturally, we find ourselves wondering how he would have covered the monumental stories ofour time.  In an era where the news that city hall is on fire can sweep around the world at thespeed of the Internet, would he still have called to double-check?

Would he have been able to cut through the murky noise of the blogs and the tweets and thesound bites to shine the bright light on substance?  Would he still offer the perspective thatwe value?  Would he have been able to remain a singular figure in an age of dwindlingattention spans and omnipresent media?
And somehow, we know that the answer is yes.  The simple values Walter Cronkite set out inpursuit of -- to seek the truth, to keep us honest, to explore our world the best he could --they are as vital today as they ever were.
Our American story continues.  It needs to be told.  And if we choose to live up to Walter'sexample, if we realize that the kind of journalism he embodied will not simply rekindle itself aspart of a natural cycle, but will come alive only if we stand up and demand it and resolve tovalue it once again, then I'm convinced that the choice between profit and progress is a falseone -- and that the golden days of journalism still lie ahead.
Walter Cronkite invited a nation to believe in him -- and he never betrayed that trust.  That'swhy so many of you entered the profession in the first place.  That's why the standards he setfor journalists still stand.  And that's why he loved and valued all of you, but we loved andvalued Walter not only as the rarest of men, but as an indispensable pillar of our society.
He's reunited with his beloved Betsy now, watching the stories of this century unfold withboundless optimism -- every so often punctuating the air with a gleeful "Oh, boy!"  We aregrateful to him for altering and illuminating our time, and for the opportunity he gave to us tosay that, yes, we, too, were there.
Thank you very much.