Well, good afternoon.  And, Sabah, thank you for the wonderful introduction and for yourexample -- your devotion to your faith and your education, and your service to others.  You’rean inspiration.  You’re going to be a fantastic doctor.  And I suspect, Sabah, your parents arehere because they wanted to see you so -- where are Sabah’s parents?  There you go.  Goodjob, Mom.  She did great, didn’t she?  She was terrific.
To everyone here at the Islamic Society of Baltimore, thank you for welcoming me heretoday.  I want to thank Muslim Americans leaders from across this city and this state, andsome who traveled even from out of state to be here.  I want to recognize Congressman JohnSarbanes, who is here.  As well as two other great leaders in Congress -- and proud MuslimAmericans -- Congressman Keith Ellison from the great state of Minnesota -- andCongressman Andre Carson from the great state of Indiana.
This mosque, like so many in our country, is an all-American story.  You’ve been part of thiscity for nearly half a century. You serve thousands of families -- some who’ve lived here fordecades as well as immigrants from many countries who’ve worked to become proudAmerican citizens.
  
Now, a lot of Americans have never visited a mosque.  To the folks watching this today whohaven’t -- think of your own church, or synagogue, or temple, and a mosque like this will bevery familiar.  This is where families come to worship and express their love for God and eachother.  There’s a school where teachers open young minds.  Kids play baseball and footballand basketball -- boys and girls -- I hear they’re pretty good.  Cub Scouts, Girl Scouts meet,recite the Pledge of Allegiance here.
With interfaith dialogue, you build bridges of understanding with other faith communities --Christians and Jews.  There’s a health clinic that serves the needy, regardless of their faith. And members of this community are out in the broader community, working for social justiceand urban development.  As voters, you come here to meet candidates.  As one of yourmembers said, “just look at the way we live...we are true Americans."
So the first thing I want to say is two words that Muslim Americans don’t hear often enough --and that is, thank you.  Thank you for serving your community.  Thank you for lifting up thelives of your neighbors, and for helping keep us strong and united as one American family. We are grateful for that.
Now, this brings me to the other reason I wanted to come here today.  I know that in Muslimcommunities across our country, this is a time of concern and, frankly, a time of some fear. Like all Americans, you’re worried about the threat of terrorism.  But on top of that, as MuslimAmericans, you also have another concern -- and that is your entire community so often istargeted or blamed for the violent acts of the very few.
The Muslim American community remains relatively small --several million people in thiscountry.  And as a result, most Americans don’t necessarily know -- or at least don't knowthat they know -- a Muslim personally.  And as a result, many only hear about Muslims andIslam from the news after an act of terrorism, or in distorted media portrayals in TV or film,all of which gives this hugely distorted impression.
And since 9/11, but more recently, since the attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, you’ve seentoo often people conflating the horrific acts of terrorism with the beliefs of an entire faith.  Andof course, recently, we’ve heard inexcusable political rhetoric against Muslim Americans thathas no place in our country.
No surprise, then, that threats and harassment of Muslim Americans have surged.  Here atthis mosque, twice last year, threats were made against your children.  Around the country,women wearing the hijab -- just like Sabah -- have been targeted. We’ve seen childrenbullied.  We’ve seen mosques vandalized.  Sikh Americans and others who are perceived to beMuslims have been targeted, as well.
  
I just had a chance to meet with some extraordinary Muslim Americans from across thecountry who are doing all sorts of work.  Some of them are doctors; some of them arecommunity leaders; religious leaders.  All of them were doing extraordinary work not just inthe Muslim community but in the American community.  And they’re proud of their work inbusiness and education, and on behalf of social justice and the environment and education.  Ishould point out they were all much younger than me -- which is happening more frequentlythese days.  And you couldn’t help but be inspired, hearing about the extraordinary work thatthey’re doing.  But you also could not help but be heartbroken to hear their worries and theiranxieties.
Some of them are parents, and they talked about how their children were asking, are wegoing to be forced out of the country, or, are we going to be rounded up?  Why do peopletreat us like that?  Conversations that you shouldn’t have to have with children -- not in thiscountry.  Not at this moment.
And that’s an anxiety echoed in letters I get from Muslim Americans around the country.  I’vehad people write to me and say, I feel like I’m a second-class citizen.  I’ve had mothers writeand say, “my heart cries every night," thinking about how her daughter might be treated atschool.  A girl from Ohio, 13 years old, told me, “I’m scared."  A girl from Texas signed herletter “a confused 14-year-old trying to find her place in the world."
These are children just like mine.  And the notion that they would be filled with doubt andquestioning their places in this great country of ours at a time when they’ve got enough toworry about -- it’s hard being a teenager already -- that’s not who we are.
We’re one American family.  And when any part of our family starts to feel separate orsecond-class or targeted, it tears at the very fabric of our nation.
It’s a challenge to our values -- and that means we have much work to do.  We’ve got totackle this head on.  We have to be honest and clear about it.   And we have to speak out. This is a moment when, as Americans, we have to truly listen to each other and learn fromeach other.  And I believe it has to begin with a common understanding of some basic facts. And I express these facts, although they’d be obvious to many of the people in this place,because, unfortunately, it’s not facts that are communicated on a regular basis through ourmedia.
So let’s start with this fact:  For more than a thousand years, people have been drawn toIslam’s message of peace.  And the very word itself, Islam, comes from salam -- peace.  Thestandard greeting is as-salamu alaykum -- peace be upon you.  And like so many faiths, Islamis rooted in a commitment to compassion and mercy and justice and charity.  Whoever wantsto enter paradise, the Prophet Muhammad taught, “let him treat people the way he would loveto be treated."  For Christians like myself, I’m assuming that sounds familiar.
  
The world’s 1.6 billion Muslims are as diverse as humanity itself.  They are Arabs andAfricans.  They're from Latin America to Southeast Asia; Brazilians, Nigerians, Bangladeshis,Indonesians.  They are white and brown and black.  There’s a large African American Muslimcommunity.  That diversity is represented here today.  A 14-year-old boy in Texas who’sMuslim spoke for many when he wrote to me and said, “We just want to live in peace."
Here’s another fact:  Islam has always been part of America. Starting in colonial times, manyof the slaves brought here from Africa were Muslim.  And even in their bondage, some kepttheir faith alive.  A few even won their freedom and became known to many Americans.  Andwhen enshrining the freedom of religion in our Constitution and our Bill of Rights, ourFounders meant what they said when they said it applied to all religions.
Back then, Muslims were often called Mahometans.  And Thomas Jefferson explained that theVirginia Statute for Religious Freedom he wrote was designed to protect all faiths -- and I’mquoting Thomas Jefferson now -- “the Jew and the Gentile, the Christian and the Mahometan."
Jefferson and John Adams had their own copies of the Quran. Benjamin Franklin wrote that“even if the Mufti of Constantinople were to send a missionary to preach to us, he would find apulpit at his service."   So this is not a new thing.
Generations of Muslim Americans helped to build our nation. They were part of the flow ofimmigrants who became farmers and merchants.  They built America’s first mosque,surprisingly enough, in North Dakota.    America’s oldest surviving mosque is in Iowa.  Thefirst Islamic center in New York City was built in the 1890s.  Muslim Americans worked onHenry Ford’s assembly line, cranking out cars.  A Muslim American designed the skyscrapersof Chicago.
In 1957, when dedicating the Islamic center in Washington, D.C., President Eisenhower said,“I should like to assure you, my Islamic friends, that under the American Constitution...and inAmerican hearts...this place of worship, is just as welcome...as any other religion."
And perhaps the most pertinent fact, Muslim Americans enrich our lives today in every way. They’re our neighbors, the teachers who inspire our children, the doctors who trust us withour health -- future doctors like Sabah.  They’re scientists who win Nobel Prizes, youngentrepreneurs who are creating new technologies that we use all the time.  They’re the sportsheroes we cheer for -— like Muhammad Ali and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Hakeem Olajuwon. And by the way, when Team USA marches into the next Olympics, one of the Americanswaving the red, white and blue -- will a fencing champion, wearing her hijab, IbtihajMuhammad, who is here today.  Stand up.  I told her to bring home the gold.  Not to put anypressure on you.
Muslim Americans keep us safe.  They’re our police and our firefighters.  They're in homelandsecurity, in our intelligence community.  They serve honorably in our armed forces -- meaningthey fight and bleed and die for our freedom.  Some rest in Arlington National Cemetery.
  
So Muslim Americans are some of the most resilient and patriotic Americans you’ll ever meet. We’re honored to have some of our proud Muslim American servicemembers here today. Please stand if you're here, so we can thank you for your service.
So part of the reason I want to lay out these facts is because, in the discussions that I washaving with these incredibly accomplished young people, they were pointing that so often theyfelt invisible.  And part of what we have to do is to lift up the contributions of the MuslimAmerican community not when there’s a problem, but all the time.
Our television shows should have some Muslim characters that are unrelated to nationalsecurity -- because -- it’s not that hard to do.  There was a time when there were no blackpeople on television.  And you can tell good stories while still representing the reality of ourcommunities.
Now, we do have another fact that we have to acknowledge.  Even as the overwhelmingmajority -- and I repeat, the overwhelming majority -- of the world’s Muslims embrace Islamas a source of peace, it is undeniable that a small fraction of Muslims propagate a pervertedinterpretation of Islam.  This is the truth.
Groups like al Qaeda and ISIL, they’re not the first extremists in history to misuse God’sname.  We’ve seen it before, across faiths.  But right now, there is a organized extremistelement that draws selectively from Islamic texts, twists them in an attempt to justify theirkilling and their terror.  They combine it with false claims that America and the West are atwar with Islam.  And this warped thinking that has found adherents around the world --including, as we saw, tragically, in Boston and Chattanooga and San Bernardino -- is real.  It’sthere.  And it creates tensions and pressure that disproportionately burden the overwhelmingmajority of law-abiding Muslim citizens.
And the question then is, how do we move forward together?  How do we keep our countrystrong and united?  How do we defend ourselves against organizations that are bent on killinginnocents?  And it can’t be the work of any one faith alone.  It can’t be just a burden on theMuslim community -- although the Muslim community has to play a role.  We all haveresponsibilities.  So with the time I have left, I just want to suggest a few principles that Ibelieve can guide us.
First, at a time when others are trying to divide us along lines of religion or sect, we have toreaffirm that most fundamental of truths:  We are all God’s children.  We’re all born equal,with inherent dignity.
And so often, we focus on our outward differences and we forget how much we share. Christians, Jews, Muslims -- we’re all, under our faiths, descendants of Abraham.  So meretolerance of different religions is not enough.
  
Our faiths summon us to embrace our common humanity.  “O mankind," the Quran teaches,we have “made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another."  So all of us havethe task of expressing our religious faith in a way that seeks to build bridges rather than todivide.
Second, as Americans, we have to stay true to our core values, and that includes freedom ofreligion for all faiths.  I already mentioned our Founders, like Jefferson, knew that religiousliberty is essential not only to protect religion but because religion helps strengthen our nation-- if it is free, if it is not an extension of the state.  Part of what’s happened in the Middle Eastand North Africa and other places where we see sectarian violence is religion being a tool foranother agenda -- for power, for control.  Freedom of religion helps prevent that, both ways --protects religious faiths, protects the state from  -- or those who want to take over the statefrom using religious animosity as a tool for their own ends.
That doesn’t mean that those of us with religious faith should not be involved.  We have to beactive citizenry.  But we have to respect the fact that we have freedom of religion.
Remember, many preachers and pastors fought to abolish the evil of slavery.  People of faithadvocated to improve conditions for workers and ban child labor.  Dr. King was joined bypeople of many faiths, challenging us to live up to our ideals.  And that civil activism, thatcivic participation that’s the essence of our democracy, it is enhanced by freedom of religion.
Now, we have to acknowledge that there have been times where we have fallen short of ourideals.  By the way, Thomas Jefferson’s opponents tried to stir things up by suggesting he wasa Muslim -- so I was not the first --  No, it’s true, it’s true.  Look it up.    I’m in good company.
But it hasn’t just been attacks of that sort that have been used.  Mormon communities havebeen attacked throughout our history.  Catholics, including, most prominently, JFK -- John F.Kennedy -- when he ran for President, was accused of being disloyal.  There was a suggestionthat he would be taking orders from the Pope as opposed to upholding his constitutionalduties. Anti-Semitism in this country has a sad and long history, and Jews were excluderoutinely from colleges and professions and from public office.
And so if we’re serious about freedom of religion -- and I’m speaking now to my fellowChristians who remain the majority in this country -- we have to understand an attack on onefaith is an attack on all our faiths.   And when any religious group is targeted, we all have aresponsibility to speak up.  And we have to reject a politics that seeks to manipulate prejudiceor bias, and targets people because of religion.
We’ve got to make sure that hate crimes are punished, and that the civil rights of allAmericans are upheld.
  
And just as faith leaders, including Muslims, must speak out when Christians are persecutedaround the world -- or when anti-Semitism is on the rise -- because the fact is, is that thereare Christians who are targeted now in the Middle East, despite having been there forcenturies, and there are Jews who’ve lived in places like France for centuries who now feelobliged to leave because they feel themselves under assault --sometimes by Muslims.  Wehave to be consistent in condemning hateful rhetoric and violence against everyone.   Andthat includes against Muslims here in the United States of America.
So none of us can be silent.  We can’t be bystanders to bigotry.  And together, we’ve got toshow that America truly protects all faiths.
Which brings me to my next point:  As we protect our country from terrorism, we should notreinforce the ideas and the rhetoric of the terrorists themselves.  I often hear it said that weneed moral clarity in this fight.  And the suggestion is somehow that if I would simply say,these are all Islamic terrorists, then we would actually have solved the problem by now,apparently.    Well, I agree, we actually do need moral clarity.  Let’s have some moral clarity.
Groups like ISIL are desperate for legitimacy.  They try to portray themselves as religiousleaders and holy warriors who speak for Islam.  I refuse to give them legitimacy.  We mustnever give them that legitimacy.  They’re not defending Islam.  They’re not defendingMuslims.  The vast majority of the people they kill are innocent Muslim men, women andchildren.
And, by the way, the notion that America is at war with Islam ignores the fact that the world’sreligions are a part of who we are.  We can’t be at war with any other religion because theworld’s religions are a part of the very fabric of the United States, our national character.
So the best way for us to fight terrorism is to deny these organizations legitimacy and to showthat here in the United States of America, we do not suppress Islam; we celebrate and lift upthe success of Muslim Americans.  That’s how we show the lie that they’re trying topropagate.   We shouldn’t play into terrorist propaganda.  And we can’t suggest that Islamitself is at the root of the problem.  That betrays our values.  It alienates Muslim Americans. It’s hurtful to those kids who are trying to go to school and are members of the Boy Scouts,and are thinking about joining our military.
That kind of mindset helps our enemies.  It helps our enemies recruit.  It makes us all lesssafe.  So let’s be clear about that.
Now, finally, just as all Americans have a responsibility to reject discrimination -- I’ve said thisbefore -- Muslims around the world have a responsibility to reject extremist ideologies thatare trying to penetrate within Muslim communities.
  
Here at this mosque, and across our country and around the world, Muslim leaders areroundly and repeatedly and consistently condemning terrorism.  And around the globe,Muslims who’ve dared to speak out have often been targeted and even killed.  So those voicesare there; we just have to amplify them more.
And it was interesting, in the discussion I had before I came out, some people said, why isthere always a burden on us? When a young man in Charleston shoots African Americans in achurch, there’s not an expectation that every white person in America suddenly is explainingthat they’re not racist.  They can Everybody is assumed to be horrified by that act.  And Irecognize that sometimes that doesn't feel fair.
But part of the answer is to make sure that the Muslim community in all of its variety, in allthe good works that it’s doing, in all the talent that's on display, that it’s out there visible on aconsistent basis -- not just at a certain moment.
But what is also true is, is that there is a battle of hearts and minds that takes place -- that istaking place right now, and American Muslims are better positioned than anybody to showthat it is possible to be faithful to Islam and to be part of a pluralistic society, and to be on thecutting-edge of science, and to believe in democracy.
And so I would urge all of you not to see this as a burden, but as a great opportunity and agreat privilege to show who you are.  To use a little Christian expression -- let your lightshine.  Because when you do you’ll make clear that this is not a clash of civilizations betweenthe West and Islam.  This is a struggle between the peace-loving, overwhelming majority ofMuslims around the world and a radical, tiny minority.  And ultimately, I’m confident that theoverwhelming majority will win that battle.   Muslims will decide the future of your faith.  AndI’m confident in the direction that it will go.
But across the Islamic world, influential voices should consistently speak out with anaffirmative vision of their faith. And it’s happening.  These are the voices of Muslim clerics whoteach that Islam prohibits terrorism, for the Quran says whoever kills an innocent, it is as if hehas killed all mankind.   These are the voices of Muslim scholars, some of whom join us today,who know Islam has a tradition of respect for other faiths; and Muslim teachers who point outthat the first word revealed in the Quran -- igra -- means “read" -- to seek knowledge, toquestion assumptions.
Muslim political leaders have to push back on the lie that the West oppresses Muslims, andagainst conspiracy theories that says America is the cause of every ill in the Middle East. Now, that doesn't mean that Muslim Americans aren’t free to criticize American -- U.S. foreignpolicy.  That's part of being an American.  I promise you, as the President of the UnitedStates, I’m mindful that that is a healthy tradition that is alive and well in America.    But likeleaders everywhere, these leaders have been offering, and need to continue to offer, apositive vision for progress, and that includes political and economic progress.
  
And we have to acknowledge that much of the violence in places like the Middle East is nowturning into fights between sects -- Shia, Sunni and others -- where differences are oftenexploited to serve political agendas, as I said earlier.  And this bloodshed is destroying Muslimfamilies and communities, and there has to be global pressure to have the vision and thecourage to end this kind of thinking and this approach to organizing political power.
It’s not historically unique.  It’s happened in every part of the world -- from Northern Irelandto Africa, to Asia, to right here in the United States -- in the past.  But it is something that wehave to fight against.
And we know it’s possible.  Across the history of Islam, different sects traditionally have livedand thrived together peacefully.  And in many parts of the world they do today, including herein the United States.
Like people of all religions, Muslims living their faith in a modern, pluralistic world are calledupon to uphold human rights, to make sure that everyone has opportunity.  That includes theaspirations of women and youth and all people.  If we expect our own dignity to be respected,so must we respect the dignity of others.
So let me conclude by saying that as Muslim communities stand up for the future that youbelieve in, that you exhibit in your daily lives, as you teach your children, America will be yourpartner.  We will -- I will -- do everything I can to lift up the multiplicity of Muslim voices thatpromote pluralism and peace.   We will continue to reach out to young Muslims around theworld, empowering them with science and technology and entrepreneurship, so they canpursue their God-given potential, and help build up their communities and provideopportunity.  It’s why we will continue to partner with Muslim American communities -- notjust to help you protect against extremist threats, but to expand health care and educationand opportunity -- because that’s the best way to build strong, resilient communities.
Our values must guide us in this work.  Engagement with Muslim American communities mustnever be a cover for surveillance.   We can’t give in to profiling entire groups of people. There’s no one single profile of terrorists.  We can’t securitize our entire relationship withMuslim Americans.  We can’t deal with you solely through the prism of law enforcement. We’ve got to build trust and mutual respect.  That’s how we’ll keep our communities strongand our communities united.
As I was in discussion with the young people before I came in here, I said this will be aprocess.  Law enforcement has a tough job.  Some of these groups are specifically trying totarget Muslim youth.  We’re going to have to be partners in this process.  There will be timeswhere the relationship is clumsy or mishandled.  But I want you to know that from thePresident to the FBI Director, to everybody in law enforcement, my directive and theirunderstanding is, is that this is something we have to do together.  And if we don’t do it well,then we’re actually not making ourselves safer; we’re making ourselves less safe.
  
And here, I want to speak directly to the young people who may be listening.  In our lives, weall have many identities.  We are sons and daughters, and brothers and sisters.  We’reclassmates; Cub Scout troop members.  We’re followers of our faith.  We’re citizens of ourcountry.  And today, there are voices in this world, particularly over the Internet, who areconstantly claiming that you have to choose between your identities -- as a Muslim, forexample, or an American.  Do not believe them.  If you’re ever wondering whether you fit inhere, let me say it as clearly as I can, as President of the United States:  You fit in here --right here.   You’re right where you belong.  You’re part of America, too.   You’re not Muslimor American.  You’re Muslim and American.
Don’t grow cynical.  Don’t respond to ignorance by embracing a world view that suggests youmust choose between your faith and your patriotism.  Don’t believe that you have to choosebetween your best impulses and somehow embrace a world view that pits us against eachother -- or, even worse, glorifies violence.  Understand your power to bring about change. Stay engaged in your community.  Help move our country forward -- your country forward.
We are blessed to live in a nation where even if we sometimes stumble, even if we sometimesfall short, we never stop striving for our ideals.  We keep moving closer to that more perfectunion.  We’re a country where, if you work hard and if you play by the rules, you canultimately make it, no matter who you are or how you pray.  It may not always start off evenin the race, but here, more than any place else, there’s the opportunity to run that race.
And as we go forward, I want every Muslim American to remember you are not alone.  Yourfellow Americans stand with you -- just as Sabah described her friends after she decided thatshe was going to start wearing a hijab.  That’s not unusual.  Because just as so often we onlyhear about Muslims after a terrorist attack, so often we only hear about Americans’ responseto Muslims after a hate crime has happened, we don’t always hear about the extraordinaryrespect and love and community that so many Americans feel.
I’m thinking about the seven-year-old boy in Texas who emptied his piggy bank to help amosque that had been vandalized.  Or all the faith communities that rallied around MuslimAmericans after the tragedy in Chapel Hill.  The churches and the synagogues standingshoulder-to-shoulder with their local mosques, including the woman carrying a sign saying“We love our Muslim neighbors."  Think of our men and women in uniform who, when theyheard that a little girl was afraid because she’s a Muslim, sent her a message -- “I Will ProtectYou."
I want every American to remember how Muslim communities are standing up for others, aswell.  Because right now, as we speak, there are Muslims in Kenya who saved Christians fromterrorists, and Muslims who just met in Morocco to protect religious minorities, includingChristians and Jews.   The good people of this mosque helped this city move forward after theturmoil of last year.  Muslim Americans across the country helped African American churchesrebuild after arson.
  
Remember the Muslim Americans in Boston who reached out to victims of the Marathonbombing; the Muslim Americans across the country who raised money for the families of SanBernardino; the Muslim Americans in Chattanooga who honored our fallen servicemembers,one of them saying, “in the name of God, the God of Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad,God bless our fallen heroes."
We are one American family.  We will rise and fall together. It won’t always be easy.  Therewill be times where our worst impulses are given voice.  But I believe that ultimately, our bestvoices will win out.  And that gives me confidence and faith in the future.
After more than 200 years, our blended heritage, the patchwork quilt which is America, that isnot a weakness, that is one of our greatest strengths.  It’s what makes us a beacon to theworld.  It’s what led that mother who wrote to me -- the one who worries about her youngdaughter -- it led her to end her letter with hope, despite her fears.  She said, “I still believein one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all."
May God's peace be upon you.
May God bless the United States of America.
Thank you very much, everybody.
