Alright. First of all, I want to thank Gail and Charlie who are on the scene doing work everytime we have a disaster here in the United States of America.  But obviously, the Red Cross isdoing outstanding work internationally, so we want to thank them for their outstanding work.
A few things that I want to emphasize to the public at the top.  This storm is not yet over. We’ve gotten briefings from the National Hurricane Center.  It is still moving north.  There arestill communities that could be affected.  And so I want to emphasize there are still risks offlooding, there are still risks of down power lines, risks of high winds.  And so it is veryimportant for the public to continue to monitor the situation in your local community, listen toyour state and local officials, follow instructions.  The more you follow instructions, the easierit is for our first responders to make sure that they are dealing with true emergencysituations.  So the better prepared individual families are for the situation, the easier it isgoing to be for us to deal with it.
Next, obviously, I want to talk about the extraordinary hardship that we’ve seen over the last48 hours.  Our thoughts and prayers go out to all the families who have lost loved ones. Unfortunately, there have been fatalities as a consequence of Hurricane Sandy, and it’s notclear that we’ve counted up all the fatalities at this point.  And obviously, this is somethingthat is heartbreaking for the entire nation.  And we certainly feel profoundly for all the familieswhose lives have been upended and are going to be going through some very tough timesover the next several days and perhaps several weeks and months.
  
The most important message I have for them is that America is with you.  We are standingbehind you, and we are going to do everything we can to help you get back on your feet.
Earlier today I had a conversation with the governors and many of the mayors in the affectedareas, including Governor Christie, Governor Cuomo, and Mayor Bloomberg.  I want to praisethem for the extraordinary work that they have done.  Sadly, we are getting more experiencewith these kinds of big impact storms along the East Coast, and the preparation shows.  Wereit not for the outstanding work that they and their teams have already done and will continueto do in the affected regions, we could have seen more deaths and more property damage. So they have done extraordinary work working around the clock.  The coordination betweenthe state, local, and federal governments has been outstanding. 
Obviously, we’re now moving into the recovery phase in a lot of the most severely affectedareas.  New Jersey, New York in particular have been pounded by this storm.  Connecticut hastaken a big hit.  Because of some of the work that had been done ahead of time, we’ve beenable to get over a thousand FEMA officials in place, pre-positioned.  We’ve been able to getsupplies, food, medicine, water, emergency generators to ensure that hospitals and lawenforcement offices are able to stay up and running as they are out there responding.
We are going to continue to push as hard as we can to make sure that power is up throughoutthe region.  And obviously, this is mostly a local responsibility, and the private utilities aregoing to have to lean forward, but we are doing everything we can to provide them additionalresources so that we can expedite getting power up and running in many of thesecommunities.
There are places like Newark, New Jersey, for example, where you’ve got 80, 90 percent ofthe people without power.  We can't have a situation where that lasts for days on end.  And somy instructions to the federal agency has been, do not figure out why we can't do something;I want you to figure out how we do something.  I want you to cut through red tape.  I wantyou to cut through bureaucracy.  There’s no excuse for inaction at this point.  I want everyagency to lean forward and to make sure that we are getting the resources where they need -
- where they're needed as quickly as possible.
So I want to repeat -- my message to the federal government:  No bureaucracy, no red tape. Get resources where they're needed as fast as possible, as hard as possible, and for theduration, because the recovery process obviously in a place like New Jersey is going to take asignificant amount of time.  The recovery process in a lower Manhattan is going to take a lotof time.
And part of what we’re trying to do here is also to see where are some resources that can bebrought to bear that maybe traditionally are not used in these kind of disaster situations.  Forexample, there may be military assets that allow us to help move equipment to ensure thatpumping and getting the flooding out of New York subway systems can proceed more quickly.  
  
There may be resources that we can bring to bear to help some of the private utilities gettheir personnel and their equipment in place more swiftly so that we can get power up andrunning as soon as possible.
So my message to the governors and the mayors and, through them, to the communities thathave been hit so hard is that we are going to do everything we can to get resources to youand make sure that any unmet need that is identified, we are responding to it as quickly aspossible.  And I told the mayors and the governors if they're getting no for an answersomewhere in the federal government, they can call me personally at the White House.
Now, obviously, the state, local, federal response is important, but what we do as acommunity, what we do as neighbors and as fellow citizens is equally important.  So a coupleof things that I want the public to know they can do.
First of all, because our local law enforcement, our first responders are being swamped, to theextent that everybody can be out there looking out for their neighbors, especially older folks, Ithink that's really important.  If you’ve got a neighbor nearby, you’re not sure how they'rehandling a power outage, flooding, et cetera, go over, visit them, knock on their door, makesure that they're doing okay.  That can make a big difference.  The public can be the eyes andears in terms of identifying unmet needs.
Second thing, the reason we’re here is because the Red Cross knows what it’s doing when itcomes to emergency response.  And so for people all across the country who have not beenaffected, now is the time to show the kind of generosity that makes America the greatestnation on Earth.  And a good place to express that generosity is by contributing to the RedCross.
Obviously, you can go on their website.  The Red Cross knows what they're doing.  They're inclose contact with federal, state, and local officials.  They will make sure that we get theresources to those families as swiftly as possible.  And again, I want to thank everybody herewho is doing such a great job when it comes to the disaster response.
The final message I’d just say is during the darkness of the storm, I think we also saw what’sbrightest in America.  I think all of us obviously have been shocked by the force of MotherNature as we watch it on television.  At the same time, we’ve also seen nurses at NYUHospital carrying fragile newborns to safety.  We’ve seen incredibly brave firefighters inQueens, waist-deep in water, battling infernos and rescuing people in boats. 
One of my favorite stories is down in North Carolina, the Coast Guard going out to save asinking ship.  They sent a rescue swimmer out, and the rescue swimmer said, “Hi, I’m Dan.  Iunderstand you guys need a ride.”  That kind of spirit of resilience and strength, but mostimportantly looking out for one another, that's why we always bounce back from these kindsof disasters.
  
This is a tough time for a lot of people -- millions of folks all across the Eastern Seaboard.  ButAmerica is tougher, and we’re tougher because we pull together.  We leave nobody behind. We make sure that we respond as a nation and remind ourselves that whenever an Americanis in need, all of us stand together to make sure that we’re providing the help that'snecessary.
So I just want to thank the incredible response that we’ve already seen, but I do want toremind people this is going to take some time.  It is not going to be easy for a lot of thesecommunities to recovery swiftly, and so it’s going to be important that we sustain that spirit ofresilience, that we continue to be good neighbors for the duration until everybody is back ontheir feet.
Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you, Red Cross.
