Good afternoon, everybody.  The immediate reviews that I ordered after the failed Christmasterrorist attack are now complete.  I was just briefed on the findings and recommendations forreform, and I believe it's important that the American people understand the new steps thatwe're taking to prevent attacks and keep our country safe. 
This afternoon, my Counterterrorism and Homeland Security Advisor, John Brennan, willdiscuss his review into our terrorist watchlist system -- how our government failed to connectthe dots in a way that would have prevented a known terrorist from boarding a plane forAmerica, and the steps we're going to take to prevent that from happening again.
Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano will discuss her review of aviation screening,technology and procedures -- how that terrorist boarded a plane with explosives that couldhave killed nearly 300 innocent people, and how we'll strengthen aviation security goingforward.
So today I want to just briefly summarize their conclusions and the steps that I've ordered toaddress them.

In our ever-changing world, America's first line of defense is timely, accurate intelligence thatis shared, integrated, analyzed, and acted upon quickly and effectively.  That's what theintelligence reforms after the 9/11 attacks largely achieved. That's what our intelligencecommunity does every day.  But, unfortunately, that's not what happened in the lead-up toChristmas Day.  It's now clear that shortcomings occurred in three broad and compoundingways. 
First, although our intelligence community had learned a great deal about the al Qaedaaffiliate in Yemen -- called al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula -- that we knew that they soughtto strike the United States and that they were recruiting operatives to do so -- the intelligencecommunity did not aggressively follow up on and prioritize particular streams of intelligencerelated to a possible attack against the homeland.
Second, this contributed to a larger failure of analysis -- a failure to connect the dots ofintelligence that existed across our intelligence community and which, together, could haverevealed that Abdulmutallab was planning an attack.
Third, this, in turn, fed into shortcomings in the watch-listing system which resulted in thisperson not being placed on the "no fly" list, thereby allowing him to board that plane inAmsterdam for Detroit.   
In sum, the U.S. government had the information -- scattered throughout the system -- topotentially uncover this plot and disrupt the attack.  Rather than a failure to collect or shareintelligence, this was a failure to connect and understand the intelligence that we already had.
That's why we took swift action in the immediate days following Christmas, includingreviewing and updating the terrorist watchlist system and adding more individuals to the "nofly" list, and directing our embassies and consulates to include current visa information in theirwarnings of individuals with terrorist or suspected terrorist ties. 
Today, I'm directing a series of additional corrective steps across multiple agencies.  Broadlyspeaking, they fall into four areas.
First, I'm directing that our intelligence community immediately begin assigning specificresponsibility for investigating all leads on high-priority threats so that these leads arepursued and acted upon aggressively -- not just most of the time, but all of the time.  Wemust follow the leads that we get.  And we must pursue them until plots are disrupted.  Andthat mean assigning clear lines of responsibility.
Second, I'm directing that intelligence reports, especially those involving potential threats tothe United States, be distributed more rapidly and more widely.  We can't sit on informationthat could protect the American people.

Third, I'm directing that we strengthen the analytical process, how our analysis -- how ouranalysts process and integrate the intelligence that they receive.  My Director of NationalIntelligence, Denny Blair, will take the lead in improving our day-to-day efforts.  MyIntelligence Advisory Board will examine the longer-term challenge of sifting through vastuniverses of intelligence and data in our Information Age.   
And finally, I'm ordering an immediate effort to strengthen the criteria used to add individualsto our terrorist watchlists, especially the "no fly" list.  We must do better in keeping dangerouspeople off airplanes, while still facilitating air travel.
So taken together, these reforms will improve the intelligence community's ability to collect,share, integrate, analyze, and act on intelligence swiftly and effectively.  In short, they willhelp our intelligence community do its job even better and protect American lives.
But even the best intelligence can't identify in advance every individual who would do usharm.  So we need the security -- at our airports, ports, and borders, and through ourpartnerships with other nations -- to prevent terrorists from entering America. 
At the Amsterdam airport, Abdulmutallab was subjected to the same screening as otherpassengers.  He was required to show his documents -- including a valid U.S. visa.  His carry-
on bag was X-rayed.  He passed through a metal detector.  But a metal detector can't detectthe kind of explosives that were sewn into his clothes.
As Secretary Napolitano will explain, the screening technologies that might have detectedthese explosives are in use at the Amsterdam airport, but not at the specific checkpoints thathe passed through.  Indeed, most airports in the world -- and in the United States -- do notyet have these technologies.  Now, there's no silver bullet to securing the thousands of flightsinto America each day, domestic and international.  It will require significant investments inmany areas.  And that's why, even before the Christmas attack, we increased investments inhomeland security and aviation security.  This includes an additional one billion dollars in newsystems and technologies that we need to protect our airports -- more baggage screening,more passenger screening and more advanced explosive detection capabilities, including thosethat can improve our ability to detect the kind of explosive used on Christmas.  These aremajor investments and they'll make our skies safer and more secure.
As I announced this week, we've taken a whole range of steps to improve aviation screeningand security since Christmas, including new rules for how we handle visas within thegovernment and enhanced screening for passengers flying from, or through, certaincountries. 
And today, I'm directing that the Department of Homeland Security take additional steps,including:  strengthening our international partnerships to improve aviation screening andsecurity around the world; greater use of the advanced explosive detection technologies thatwe already have, including imaging technology; and working aggressively, in cooperation with

the Department of Energy and our National Labs, to develop and deploy the next generationof screening technologies.
Now, there is, of course, no foolproof solution.  As we develop new screening technologies andprocedures, our adversaries will seek new ways to evade them, as was shown by theChristmas attack.  In the never-ending race to protect our country, we have to stay one stepahead of a nimble adversary.  That's what these steps are designed to do.  And we willcontinue to work with Congress to ensure that our intelligence, homeland security, and lawenforcement communities have the resources they need to keep the American people safe.
I ordered these two immediate reviews so that we could take immediate action to secure ourcountry.  But in the weeks and months ahead, we will continue a sustained and intensiveeffort of analysis and assessment, so that we leave no stone unturned in seeking better waysto protect the American people.  I have repeatedly made it clear -- in public with the American people, and in private with mynational security team -- that I will hold my staff, our agencies and the people in themaccountable when they fail to perform their responsibilities at the highest levels. 
Now, at this stage in the review process it appears that this incident was not the fault of asingle individual or organization, but rather a systemic failure across organizations andagencies.  That's why, in addition to the corrective efforts that I've ordered, I've directedagency heads to establish internal accountability reviews, and directed my national securitystaff to monitor their efforts.  We will measure progress.  And John Brennan will report back tome within 30 days and on a regular basis after that.  All of these agencies -- and their leaders-- are responsible for implementing these reforms. And all will be held accountable if theydon't. 
Moreover, I am less interested in passing out blame than I am in learning from and correctingthese mistakes to make us safer.  For ultimately, the buck stops with me.  As President, Ihave a solemn responsibility to protect our nation and our people.  And when the system fails,it is my responsibility. 
Over the past two weeks, we've been reminded again of the challenge we face in protectingour country against a foe that is bent on our destruction.  And while passions and politics canoften obscure the hard work before us, let's be clear about what this moment demands.  Weare at war.  We are at war against al Qaeda, a far-reaching network of violence and hatredthat attacked us on 9/11, that killed nearly 3,000 innocent people, and that is plotting tostrike us again.  And we will do whatever it takes to defeat them.
And we've made progress.  Al Qaeda's leadership is hunkered down.  We have worked closelywith partners, including Yemen, to inflict major blows against al Qaeda leaders.  And we havedisrupted plots at home and abroad, and saved American lives.

And we know that the vast majority of Muslims reject al Qaeda.  But it is clear that al Qaedaincreasingly seeks to recruit individuals without known terrorist affiliations not just in theMiddle East, but in Africa and other places, to do their bidding.  That's why I've directed mynational security team to develop a strategy that addresses the unique challenges posed bylone recruits.  And that's why we must communicate clearly to Muslims around the world thatal Qaeda offers nothing except a bankrupt vision of misery and death –- including the murderof fellow Muslims –- while the United States stands with those who seek justice and progress.
To advance that progress, we've sought new beginnings with Muslim communities around theworld, one in which we engage on the basis of mutual interest and mutual respect, and worktogether to fulfill the aspirations that all people share -- to get an education, to work withdignity, to live in peace and security.  That's what America believes in.  That's the vision thatis far more powerful than the hatred of these violent extremists.
Here at home, we will strengthen our defenses, but we will not succumb to a siege mentalitythat sacrifices the open society and liberties and values that we cherish as Americans,because great and proud nations don't hunker down and hide behind walls of suspicion andmistrust.  That is exactly what our adversaries want, and so long as I am President, we willnever hand them that victory.  We will define the character of our country, not some band ofsmall men intent on killing innocent men, women and children.
And in this cause, every one of us -- every American, every elected official -- can do our part. Instead of giving into cynicism and division, let's move forward with the confidence andoptimism and unity that defines us as a people.  For now is not a time for partisanship, it's atime for citizenship -- a time to come together and work together with the seriousness ofpurpose that our national security demands.
That's what it means to be strong in the face of violent extremism.  That's how we will prevailin this fight.  And that's how we will protect our country and pass it -- safer and stronger -- tothe next generation.
Thanks very much.