Thank you so much.  Thank you. Everybody have a seat.  Well, thank you, Edith, for yourintroduction.  Edith and I go a long way back.  In law school we served on the law reviewtogether.  I will not say who edited who.  I will say she looks exactly the same.  And I do not. And it's upsetting.
Edith, in your career, you’ve stood up for citizens and communities.  I was proud to nominateyou -- first as a commissioner, and then as chairwoman of the FTC.  You are doing anoutstanding job, as are your fellow commissioners, and we very much appreciate youroutstanding efforts.   
And Edith’s story, from the daughter of Mexican immigrants to the head of the FTC, we see acentral part of the American story.  And that's worth remembering at a time when those areissues that we're debating all the time.  It's a reminder that what makes this country special isthe incredible talent that we draw from all around the world and somehow it all merges intosomething unique:  America. 
To Edith, to the fellow commissioners, to all of you who work at the FTC -- thanks forwelcoming me.  I’m told I may be the first President to come to the FTC in nearly 80 years,since FDR in -- first time apparently since FDR in 1937, which is a little surprising.  I mean,you’d think like one of the Presidents would just come here by accident.  They ended up in thewrong building, we're already at the FTC.
  
Anyway, I figured it was time to correct that.  Plus, I know sometimes your name confusesfolks.  They don’t always understand what your mission is.  One person who does understandis David Letterman.  A few months ago he thanked you for standing up to the companies thatwere trying to pitch a new weight-loss product -- “caffeine-laced undergarments.”  I’mactually not making this up.  You ruled that these products were “not substantiated byscientific evidence.”  So, thank you for saving America from caffeine-laced undergarments. These companies owed consumers a refund. 
And that was just the latest example, because, as Edith said, you recently celebrated your100th anniversary.  And I want to thank you for 100 proud years of protecting Americanconsumers.  I also want to thank some of the members of Congress who are here today andmany of our partners from not just government but the private sector, and consumer andprivacy and advocacy groups. 
Next week, just up the street, I will deliver the State of the Union address.  And it will be achance to talk about America’s resurgence, including something we can all be proud of, whichis the longest stretch of private sector job growth in American history -- 58 straight monthsand more than 11 million new jobs.  In the speech, I’m going to focus on how we can build onthat progress and help more Americans feel that resurgence in their own lives, through higherwages and rising incomes and a growing middle class. 
But since I’ve only got two years left in this job, I tend to be impatient and I didn’t want towait for the State of the Union to start sharing my plans.  So I’ve been traveling across thecountry rolling out some of the ideas that we’ll be talking about, a little bit of a sneakpreview. 
And in the 21st century -- in this dizzying age of technology and innovation -- so much of theprosperity that we seek, so many of the jobs that we create, so much of the opportunity that’savailable for the next generation depends on our digital economy.  It depends on our ability tosearch and connect and shop and do business and create and discover and learn online, incyberspace.  And as we’ve all been reminded over the past year, including the hack of Sony,this extraordinary interconnection creates enormous opportunities, but also creates enormousvulnerabilities for us as a nation and for our economy, and for individual families.  
So this week, I’m laying out some new proposals on how we can keep seizing the possibilitiesof an Information Age, while protecting the security and prosperity and values that we allcherish.  Today, I’m focusing on how we can better protect American consumers from identitytheft and ensure our privacy, including for our children at school.  And then tomorrow, at theDepartment of Homeland Security, I’ll focus on how we can work with the private sector tobetter defend ourselves against cyber-attacks.  And final, on Wednesday, in Iowa, I’ll talkabout how we can give families and communities faster, cheaper access to broadband so theycan succeed in the digital economy.
  
But I wanted to start here, at the FTC, because every day you take the lead in making surethat Americans, their hard-earned money and their privacy are protected, especially whenthey go online.  And these days, that’s pretty much for everything:  managing our bankaccounts, paying our bills, handling everything from medical records to movie tickets,controlling our homes -- smart houses, from smart phones.  Secret Service does not let me dothat.  But I know other people do. 
And with these benefits come risks -- major companies get hacked; America’s personalinformation, including financial information, gets stolen.  And the problem is growing, and itcosts us billions of dollars.  In one survey, 9 out of 10 Americans say they feel like they’ve lostcontrol of their personal information.  In recent breaches, more than 100 million Americanshave had their personal data compromised, like credit card information.  When these cybercriminals start racking up charges on your card, it can destroy your credit rating.  It can turnyour life upside down.  It may take you months to get your finances back in order.  So this isa direct threat to the economic security of American families and we’ve got to stop it.
If we’re going to be connected, then we need to be protected.  As Americans, we shouldn’thave to forfeit our basic privacy when we go online to do our business.  And that’s why, sinceI took office, we’ve been working with the private sector to strengthen our cyber defenses.  Afew months ago, we launched our BuySecure initiative.  The federal government andcompanies across the country are moving to stronger chip-and-pin technology for creditcards.   Here at the FTC, you’re working with credit bureaus so that victims can recover theirstolen identities faster, and every day you’re helping consumers with IdentityTheft.gov
So today I’m announcing new steps to protect the identities and privacy of the Americanpeople.  Let me list them for you.  First, we’re introducing new legislation to create a single,strong national standard so Americans know when their information has been stolen ormisused.  Right now, almost every state has a different law on this, and it’s confusing forconsumers and it’s confusing for companies -- and it’s costly, too, to have to comply to thispatchwork of laws.  Sometimes, folks don’t even find out their credit card information hasbeen stolen until they see charges on their bill, and then it’s too late.  So under the newstandard that we’re proposing, companies would have to notify consumers of a breach within30 days.  In addition, we’re proposing to close loopholes in the law so we can go after morecriminals who steal and sell the identities of Americans —- even when they do it overseas. 
Second, I’m pleased that more banks, credit card issuers and lenders are stepping up andequipping Americans with another weapon against identity theft, and that’s access to theircredit scores, free of charge.  This includes JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, USAA, StateEmployees’ Credit Union, Ally Financial.  Some of them are here today.  I want to thank themfor their participation.  This means that a majority of American adults will have free access totheir credit score, which is like an early warning system telling you that you’ve been hit byfraud so you can deal with it fast.  And we’re encouraging more companies to join this effortevery day.
  
Third, we’re going to be introducing new legislation -— a Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights. Working with many of you -— from the private sector and advocacy groups -- we’ve identifiedsome basic principles to both protect personal privacy and ensure that industry can keepinnovating.  For example, we believe that consumers have the right to decide what personaldata companies collect from them and how companies use that data, that information; theright to know that your personal information collected for one purpose can’t then be misusedby a company for a different purpose; the right to have your information stored securely bycompanies that are accountable for its use.  We believe that there ought to be some basicbaseline protections across industries.  So we're going to be introducing this legislation by theend of next month, and I hope Congress joins us to make the Consumer Privacy Bill of Rightsthe law of the land. 
And finally, we’re taking a series of actions to protect the personal information and privacy ofour children.  Those of us with kids know how hard this can be.  Whether they are texting ortweeting, or on Facebook, or Instagram, or Vine, our children are meeting up -- and they aregrowing up -- in cyberspace.  It is all-pervasive.  And here at the FTC, you’ve pushed back oncompanies and apps that collect information on our kids without permission. 
And Michelle and I are like parents everywhere -- we want to make sure that our children arebeing smart and safe online.  That's a responsibility of ours as parents.  But we needpartners.  And we need a structure that ensures that information is not being gatheredwithout us as parents or the kids knowing it.  We want our kids’ privacy protected -—wherever they sign in or log on, including at school.
Now, the good news is we’ve got new educational technologies that are transforming how ourchildren learn.  You've got innovative websites and apps and tablets, digital textbooks andtutors.  Students are getting lessons tailored to their unique learning needs.  We want toencourage that information.  And it also facilitates teachers and parents tracking studentprogress and grades in real-time.  And all this is part of what our ConnectED initiative is about-— connecting 99 percent of American students to high-speed Internet so that we’reempowering students, teachers, and parents, and giving them access to worlds they maynever have had access to before.
But we’ve already seen some instances where some companies use educational technologiesto collect student data for commercial purposes, like targeted advertising.  And parents have alegitimate concern about those kinds of practices.
So, today, we’re proposing the Student Digital Privacy Act. That's pretty straightforward. We’re saying that data collected on students in the classroom should only be used foreducational purposes -— to teach our children, not to market to our children. We want toprevent companies from selling student data to third parties for purposes other thaneducation.  We want to prevent any kind of profiling that outs certain students at adisadvantage as they go through school.
  
And we believe that this won’t just give parents more peace of mind.  We're confident that itwill make sure the tools we use in the classroom will actually support the breakthroughresearch and innovations that we need to keep unlocking new educational technologies.
Now, we didn't have to completely reinvent the wheel on this proposal.  Many states haveproposed similar legislation.  California just passed a landmark law.  And I hope Congressjoins us in this national movement to protect the privacy of our children.
We won’t wait for legislation, though.  The Department of Education is going to offer new toolsto help schools and teachers work with tech companies to protect the privacy of students.  Asof today, 75 companies across the country have signed on to a Student Privacy Pledge.  Andamong other things, they’re committing not to sell student information or use educationaltechnologies to engage in targeted advertising to students. 
Some of those companies are here today.  We want to thank you for your leadership.  I wantto encourage every company that provides these technologies to our schools to join thiseffort.  It’s the right thing to do.  And if you don’t join this effort, then we intend to make surethat those schools and those parents know you haven’t joined this effort.
So, this mission, protecting our information and privacy in the Information Age, this shouldnot be a partisan issue.  This should be something that unites all of us as Americans.  It’s oneof those new challenges in our modern society that crosses the old divides -- transcendspolitics, transcends ideology.  Liberal, conservative, Democrat, Republican, everybody isonline, and everybody understands the risks and vulnerabilities as well as opportunities thatare presented by this new world. 
Business leaders want their privacy and their children’s privacy protected, just like everybodyelse does.  Consumer and privacy advocates also want to make sure that America keepsleading the world in technology and innovation and apps.  So there are some basic, common-
sense, pragmatic steps that we ought to all be able to support. 
And rather than being at odds, I think that much of this work actually reinforces each other. The more we do to protect consumer information and privacy, the harder it is for hackers todamage our businesses and hurt our economy.  Meanwhile, the more companies strengthentheir cybersecurity, the harder it is for hackers to steal consumer information and hurtAmerican families. So we’ve got to all be working together in the same direction, and I'mconfident if we do we’ll be making progress.
We are the country that invented the Internet.  And we’re also the pioneers of thisInformation Age -- the creators, the designers, the innovators.  Our children are leaving us inthe dust, if you haven’t noticed.  They’re connecting and they’re collaborating like neverbefore, and imagining a future we can only dream of.
  
When we Americans put our minds together and our shoulder to the wheel, there’s nothing wecan’t do.  So I’m confident, if we keep at this, we can deliver the prosperity and security andprivacy that all Americans deserve.
We pioneered the Internet, but we also pioneered the Bill of Rights, and a sense that each ofus as individuals have a sphere of privacy around us that should not be breached, whether byour government, but also by commercial interests.  And since we’re pioneers in both theseareas, I'm confident that we can be pioneers in crafting the kind of architecture that will allowus to both grow, innovate, and preserve those values that are so precious to us as Americans.
Thank you very much.  And thanks to the FTC -- for all the great work you do to protect theAmerican people.
Thank you.
