Good afternoon, everybody. I just finished speaking with Secretary Lew and senior officials atthe Treasury Department to discuss the investigation into IRS personnel who improperlyscreened conservative groups applying for tax-exempt status. And I look forward to takingsome questions at tomorrow’s press conference; but today I wanted to make sure to get outto all of you some information about what we’re doing about this, and where we go from here.
I’ve reviewed the Treasury Department watchdog’s report, and the misconduct that ituncovered is inexcusable. It’s inexcusable and Americans are right to be angry about it, and Iam angry about it. I will not tolerate this kind of behavior in any agency, but especially in theIRS, given the power that it has and the reach that it has into all of our lives. And as I saidearlier, it should not matter what political stripe you’re from; the fact of the matter is, is thatthe IRS has to operate with absolute integrity. The government generally has to conduct itselfin a way that is true to the public trust. That’s especially true for the IRS.
So here’s what we’re going to do. First, we’re going to hold the responsible partiesaccountable. Yesterday I directed Secretary Lew to follow up on the IG audit to see how thishappened and who is responsible, and to make sure that we understand all the facts. Today,Secretary Lew took the first step by requesting and accepting the resignation of the actingcommissioner of the IRS, because given the controversy surrounding this audit, it’s importantto institute new leadership that can help restore confidence going forward.
  
Second, we’re going to put in place new safeguards to make sure this kind of behavior cannothappen again. And I’ve directed Secretary Lew to ensure the IRS begins implementing theIG's recommendations right away.
Third, we will work with Congress as it performs its oversight role. And our Administration hasto make sure that we are working hand in hand with Congress to get this thingfixed. Congress, Democrats, and Republicans owe it to the American people to treat thatauthority with the responsibility it deserves and in a way that doesn’t smack of politics orpartisan agendas -- because I think one thing that you’ve seen is, across the board,everybody believes what happened in...as reported in the IG report is an outrage. The goodnews is it’s fixable; and it’s in everyone’s best interest to work together to fix it.
I’ll do everything in my power to make sure nothing like this happens again by holding theresponsible parties accountable, by putting in place new checks and new safeguards, andgoing forward, by making sure that the law is applied as it should be -- in a fair and impartialway. And we’re going to have to make sure that the laws are clear so that we can haveconfidence that they are enforced in a fair and impartial way, and that there is not too muchambiguity surrounding these laws.
So that’s what I expect. That’s what the American people deserve. And that’s what we’regoing to do.
Thank you very much.
