Good afternoon, everybody.  I hope everyone had a wonderful holiday weekend -- especiallyour men and women in uniform.  This Fourth of July we were honored to once again welcomesome of our incredible troops and their families to share Fourth of July and fireworks at theWhite House.  It was another chance for us, on behalf of the American people, to express ourgratitude for their extraordinary service around the world every day.
And that includes the work that brings me here today -- our mission to degrade and ultimatelydestroy the terrorist group ISIL.  This is a cause, a coalition, that’s united countries across theglobe -- some 60 nations, including Arab partners.  Our comprehensive strategy against ISILis harnessing all elements of American power, across our government -- military, intelligence,diplomatic, economic, development and perhaps most importantly, the power of our values.
Last month, I ordered additional actions in support of our strategy.  I just met with mynational security team as part of our regular effort to assess our efforts -- what’s working andwhat we can do better.  Secretary Carter, Chairman Dempsey, I want to thank you and yourteam for welcoming us and for your leadership, including General Austin who’s leading themilitary campaign.  And I want to summarize briefly where we stand.
  
I want to start by repeating what I’ve said since the beginning.  This will not be quick.  This isa long-term campaign.  ISIL is opportunistic and it is nimble.  In many places in Syria andIraq, including urban areas, it’s dug in among innocent civilian populations.  It will take timeto root them out -- and doing so must be the job of local forces on the ground, with trainingand air support from our coalition.
As with any military effort, there will be periods of progress, but there are also going to besome setbacks -- as we’ve seen with ISIL’s gains in Ramadi in Iraq and central and southernSyria.  But today, it’s also important for us to recognize the progress that's been made.
Our coalition has now hit ISIL with more than 5,000 airstrikes.  We’ve taken out thousands offighting positions, tanks, vehicles, bomb factories, and training camps.  We’ve eliminatedthousands of fighters, including senior ISIL commanders.  And over the past year, we’ve seenthat when we have an effective partner on the ground, ISIL can be pushed back.
In Iraq, ISIL lost at the Mosul Dam.  ISIL lost at Mount Sinjar.  ISIL has lost repeatedly acrossKirkuk Province.  ISIL lost at Tikrit.  Altogether, ISIL has lost more than a quarter of thepopulated areas that it had seized in Iraq.  In Syria, ISIL lost at Kobani.  It’s recently enduredlosses across northern Syria, including the key city of Tal Abyad, denying ISIL a vital supplyroute to Raqqa, its base of operations in Syria.
So these are reminders that ISIL’s strategic weaknesses are real.  ISIL is surrounded bycountries and communities committed to its destruction.  It has no air force; our coalitionowns the skies.  ISIL is backed by no nation.  It relies on fear, sometimes executing its owndisillusioned fighters.  Its unrestrained brutality often alienates those under its rule, creatingnew enemies.  In short, ISIL’s recent losses in both Syria and Iraq prove that ISIL can and willbe defeated.
Indeed, we’re intensifying our efforts against ISIL’s base in Syria.  Our airstrikes will continueto target the oil and gas facilities that fund so much of their operations.  We’re going after theISIL leadership and infrastructure in Syria -- the heart of ISIL that pumps funds andpropaganda to people around the world.  Partnering with other countries -- sharing moreinformation, strengthening laws and border security -- allows us to work to stem the flow offoreign fighters to Syria as well as Iraq, and to stem, obviously, the flow of those fighters backinto our own countries.  This continues to be a challenge, and, working together, all ournations are going to need to do more, but we're starting to see some progress.
We’ll continue cracking down on ISIL’s illicit finance around the world.  By the way, ifCongress really wants to help in this effort, they can confirm Mr. Adam Szubin, our nomineefor Treasury Under Secretary to lead this effort.  This is a vital position to ourcounterterrorism efforts.  Nobody suggests Mr. Szubin is not qualified.  He’s highly qualified. Unfortunately, his nomination has been languishing up on the Hill, and we need the Senate toconfirm him as soon as possible.
  
Meanwhile, we continue to ramp up our training and support of local forces that are fightingISIL on the ground.  As I’ve said before, this aspect of our strategy was moving too slowly. But the fall of Ramadi has galvanized the Iraqi government.  So, with the additional steps Iordered last month, we’re speeding up training of ISIL [Iraqi] forces, including volunteersfrom Sunni tribes in Anbar Province.
More Sunni volunteers are coming forward.  Some are already being trained, and they can bea new force against ISIL.  We continue to accelerate the delivery of critical equipment,including anti-tank weapons, to Iraqi security forces, including the Peshmerga and tribalfighters.  And I made it clear to my team that we will do more to train and equip the moderateopposition in Syria.
Now, all this said, our strategy recognizes that no amount of military force will end the terrorthat is ISIL unless it’s matched by a broader effort -- political and economic -- that addressesthe underlying conditions that have allowed ISIL to gain traction.  They have filled a void, andwe have to make sure that as we push them out that void is filled.  So, as Iraqi cities andtowns are liberated from ISIL, we’re working with Iraq and the United Nations to helpcommunities rebuild the security, services and governance that they need.  We continue tosupport the efforts of Prime Minister Abadi to forge an inclusive and effective Iraqigovernment that unites all the people of Iraq -- Shia, Sunnis, Kurds and all minoritycommunities.
In Syria, the only way that the civil war will end -- and in a way so that the Syrian people canunite against ISIL -- is an inclusive political transition to a new government, without BasharAssad -- a government that serves all Syrians.  I discussed this with our Gulf CooperationCouncil partners at Camp David and during my recent call with President Putin.  I made itclear the United States will continue to work for such a transition.
And a glimmer of good news is I think an increasing recognition on the part of all the playersin the region that given the extraordinary threat that ISIL poses it is important for us to worktogether, as opposed to at cross-purposes, to make sure that an inclusive Syrian governmentexists.
While the focus of our discussions today was on Iraq and Syria, ISIL and its ideology alsoobviously pose a grave threat beyond the region.  In recent weeks we’ve seen deadly attacksin Tunisia, Kuwait and Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula.  We see a growing ISIL presence in Libya andattempts to establish footholds across North Africa, the Middle East, the Caucasus, andSoutheast Asia. We’ve seen attacks in Ottawa, Sydney, France and Copenhagen.
So I’ve called on the international community to unite against this scourge of violentextremism.  In this fight, the United States continues to lead.  When necessary to preventattacks against our nation, we’ll take direct action against terrorists.  We’ll continue to alsopartner with nations from Afghanistan to Nigeria to build up their security forces.
  
We’re going to work day and night with allies and partners to disrupt terrorist networks andthwart attacks, and to smother nascent ISIL cells that may be trying to develop in other partsof the world.
This also includes remaining vigilant in protecting against attacks here in the homeland.  Now,I think it's important for us to recognize the threat of violent extremism is not restricted toany one community.  Here in the United States, we’ve seen all kinds of homegrown terrorism. And tragically, recent history reminds us how even a single individual motivated by a hatefulideology with access to dangerous weapons can inflict horrendous harm on Americans.  So ourefforts to counter violent extremism must not target any one community because of their faithor background, including patriotic Muslim Americans who are our partners in keeping ourcountry safe.
That said, we also have to acknowledge that ISIL has been particularly effective at reachingout to and recruiting vulnerable people around the world, including here in the United States. And they are targeting Muslim communities around the world.  Numerous individuals havebeen arrested across the country for plotting attacks or attempting to join ISIL in Syria andIraq.  Two men apparently inspired by ISIL opened fire in Garland, Texas.  And because of oursuccess over the years in improving our homeland security, we’ve made it harder for terroriststo carry out large-scale attacks like 9/11 here at home.
But the threat of lone wolves or small cells of terrorists is complex -- it's harder to detect andharder to prevent.  It’s one of the most difficult challenges that we face.  And preventingthese kinds of attacks on American soil is going to require sustained effort.
So I just want to repeat, the good news is that because of extraordinary efforts from lawenforcement as well as our military intelligence, we are doing a better job at preventing anylarge-scale attacks on the homeland.  On the other hand, the small, individual lone wolfattacks or small cells become harder to detect and they become more sophisticated, usingnew technologies.  And that means that we're going to have to pick up our game to preventthese attacks.
It's also true why, ultimately, in order for us to defeat terrorist groups like ISIL and al Qaedait's going to also require us to discredit their ideology -- the twisted thinking that drawsvulnerable people into their ranks.  As I’ve said before -- and I know our military leadersagree -- this broader challenge of countering violent extremism is not simply a military effort. Ideologies are not defeated with guns; they’re defeated by better ideas -- a more attractiveand more compelling vision.
So the United States will continue to do our part, by working with partners to counter ISIL’shateful propaganda, especially online.  We’ll constantly reaffirm through words and deeds thatwe will never be at war with Islam.  We’re fighting terrorists who distort Islam and whosevictims are mostly Muslims.  But around the world, we’re also going to insist on partneringwith Muslim communities as they seek security, prosperity and the dignity that they deserve.
  
 And we're going to expect those communities to step up in terms of pushing back as hard asthey can, in conjunction with other people of goodwill, against these hateful ideologies inorder to discredit them more effectively, particularly when it comes to what we're teachingyoung people.
And this larger battle for hearts and minds is going to be a generational struggle.  It'sultimately not going to be won or lost by the United States alone.  It will be decided by thecountries and the communities that terrorists like ISIL target.  It’s going to be up to Muslimcommunities, including scholars and clerics, to keep rejecting warped interpretations of Islam,and to protect their sons and daughters from recruitment.  It will be up to all people -- leadersand citizens -- to reject the sectarianism that so often fuels the resentments and conflictsupon which terrorists are currently thriving.  It will be up to governments to address thepolitical and economic grievances that terrorists exploit.
Nations that empower citizens to decide their own destiny, that uphold human rights for alltheir people, that invest in education and create opportunities for their young people -- thosecan be powerful antidotes to extremist ideologies.  Those are the countries that will find a truepartner in the United States.
In closing, let me note that this Fourth of July we celebrated 239 years of Americanindependence.  Across more than two centuries, we’ve faced much bigger, much moreformidable challenges than this -- Civil War, a Great Depression, fascism, communism, terriblenatural disasters, 9/11.  And every time, every generation, our nation has risen to themoment.  We don’t simply endure; we emerge stronger than before.  And that will be the casehere.
Our mission to destroy ISIL and to keep our country safe will be difficult.  It will take time. There will be setbacks as well as progress.  But as President and Commander-in-Chief, I wantto say to all our men and women in uniform who are serving in this operation -- our pilots, thecrews on the ground, our personnel not only on the ground but at sea, our intelligence teamsand our diplomatic teams -- I want to thank you.  We are proud of you, and you have my totalconfidence that you’re going to succeed.
To the American people, I want to say we will continue to be vigilant.  We will persevere.  Andjust as we have for more than two centuries, we will ultimately prevail.
Thank you very much, everybody.  And thanks to the team up on the stage here with me --they’re doing an outstanding job.
Question:  Take a question?
President Obama:  You know what, I will take a question.  Go ahead.
  
Question:  Every servicemember who is listening to you today, Mr. President, is wondering,are you going to veto the defense bills that are going to pay me?  What is your latest thinkingon that? Because we've heard secondhand through statements of policy that your advisorswould threaten a veto.  What’s your take, sir?  Would you veto the appropriations bills?
President Obama:  Our men and women are going to get paid.  And if you’ll note that I'venow been President for six and a half years and we've had some wrangling with Congress inthe past -- our servicemembers haven't missed a paycheck.
But what is also important in terms of our budget is making sure that we are not short-
changing all the elements of American power that allow us to secure the nation and to projectour power around the world.  So what we're not going to do is to accept a budget that short-
changes our long-term requirements for new technologies, for readiness.  We're not going toeat our seed corn by devoting too much money on things we don't need now and robbingourselves of the capacity to make sure that we're prepared for future threats.
I've worked very closely with the Chairman and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff todevelop a budget that is realistic and that looks out into the future and says this is how we'regoing to handle any possible contingency.  And we can't do that if we've got a budget thatshort-changes vital operations and continues to fund things that are not necessary.
We also have to remind ourselves that the reason we have the best military in the world is,first and foremost, because we've got the best troops in history.  But it's also because we'vegot a strong economy, and we've got a well-educated population.  And we've got an incredibleresearch operation and universities that allow us to create new products that then can betranslated into our military superiority around the world.  We short-change those, we're goingto be less secure.
So the way we have to look at this budget is to recognize that, A, we can't think short term,we've got to think long term; and B, part of our national security is making sure that wecontinue to have a strong economy and that we continue to make the investments that weneed in things like education and research that are going to be vital for us to be successfullong term.
Question:  As an Army reservist, I'm curious to know if you have any plans to send any moreAmerican troops overseas right now, any additional forces.
President Obama:  There are no current plans to do so.  That's not something that wecurrently discussed.  I've always said that I'm going to do what’s necessary to protect thehomeland.
  
One of the principles that we all agree on, though, and I pressed folks pretty hard because inthese conversations with my military advisors I want to make sure I'm getting blunt andunadultered [sic] uncensored advice.  But in every one of the conversations that we've had,the strong consensus is that in order for us to succeed long-term in this fight against ISIL wehave to develop local security forces that can sustain progress.
It is not enough for us to simply send in American troops to temporarily set backorganizations like ISIL, but to then, as soon as we leave, see that void filled once again withextremists.  It is going to be vital for us to make sure that we are preparing the kinds of localground forces and security forces with our partners that can not only succeed against ISIL,but then sustain in terms of security and in terms of governance.
Because if we try to do everything ourselves all across the Middle East, all across North Africa,we'll be playing Whack-a-Mole and there will be a whole lot of unintended consequences thatultimately make us less secure.
All right?  Thank you.  I didn’t even plan to do this.  You guys got two bonus questions.
