Well, this is going to be the first opportunity that I have to get an extensive debriefing fromSecretary Carter, who took a trip last week to Afghanistan and other parts of the region.  He’llbe giving me some impressions about how we’re planning our drawdown and transition inAfghanistan, and talk about some other regional issues. One issue that we will be discussing is Iran.  And obviously that’s been a topic of greatinterest today, so let me just make a couple comments on that.  I did not have a chance towatch Prime Minister Netanyahu’s speech -- I was on a video conference with our Europeanpartners with respect to Ukraine.  I did have a chance to take a look at the transcript and asfar as I can tell, there was nothing new. The Prime Minister appropriately pointed out that the bond between the United States ofAmerica is unbreakable, and on that point I thoroughly agree.  He also pointed out that Iranhas been a dangerous regime and continues to engage in activities that are contrary to theinterests of the United States, to Israel, and to the region.  And on that, we agree.  He alsopointed out the fact that Iran has repeatedly threatened Israel and engaged in the mostvenomous of anti-Semitic statements.  And no one can dispute that. 
  
But on the core issue, which is how do we prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon,which would make it far more dangerous and would give it scope for even greater action inthe region, the Prime Minister didn’t offer any viable alternatives.  So let’s be clear about whatexactly the central concern should be, both for the United States and for Israel.  I’ve said since before I became President that one of my primary goals in foreign policy wouldbe preventing Iran from getting nuclear weapons.  And with the help of Congress and ourinternational partners, we constructed an extraordinarily effective sanctions regime thatpressured Iran to come to the table to negotiate in a serious fashion.  They have now beennegotiating over the last year, and during that period, Iran has, in fact, frozen its program,rolled back some of its most dangerous highly enriched uranium, and subjected itself to thekinds of verifications and inspections that we had not previously seen.
Keep in mind that when we shaped that interim deal, Prime Minister Netanyahu made almostthe precise same speech about how dangerous that deal was going to be.  And yet, over ayear later, even Israeli intelligence officers and, in some cases, members of the Israeligovernment, have to acknowledge that, in fact, it has kept Iran from further pursuing itsnuclear program. Now, the deal that we are trying to negotiate that is not yet completed would cut off thedifferent pathways for Iran to advance its nuclear capabilities.  It would roll back someelements of its program.  It would ensure that it did not have what we call a breakout capacitythat was shorter than a year’s time.  And it would subject Iran to the most vigorousinspections and verifications regimes that have ever been put in place. And the alternative that the Prime Minister offers is no deal, in which case Iran willimmediately begin once again pursuing its nuclear program, accelerate its nuclear program,without us having any insight into what they’re doing, and without constraint.  And hisessential argument is that if we just double down on sanctions, Iran won’t want to do that. Well, we have evidence from the past decade that sanctions alone are not sufficient to preventIran from pursuing its nuclear ambitions.  And if it, in fact, does not have some sense thatsanctions will be removed, it will not have an interest in avoiding the path that it’s currentlyon. So the bottom line is this:  We don’t yet have a deal.
It may be that Iran cannot say yes to a good deal.  I have repeatedly said that I would ratherhave no deal than a bad deal. But if we’re successful in negotiating, then, in fact, this will bethe best deal possible to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.  Nothing else comesclose.  Sanctions won’t do it.  Even military action would not be as successful as the deal thatwe have put forward.  
  
And I think it is very important not to be distracted by the nature of the Iranian regime’sambitions when it comes to territory or terrorism -- all issues which we share a concern withIsrael about and are working consistently with Israel on.  Because we know that if, in fact,they obtain a nuclear weapon, all those problems would be worse. So we’re staying focused on the central issue here:  How do we prevent Iran from getting anuclear weapon.  The path that we’ve proposed, if successful, by far is the best way to dothat.  That’s demonstrable.  And Prime Minister Netanyahu has not offered any kind of viablealternative that would achieve the same verifiable mechanism to prevent Iran from getting anuclear weapon. So I would urge the members of Congress who were there to continue to express their strongsupport for Israel’s security, to continue to express their strong interest in providing theassistance Israel needs to repel attacks.  I think it's important for members of Congress, on abipartisan basis, to be unified in pushing back against terrorism in the region and thedestabilizing efforts that Iran may have engaged in with our partners.  Those are all things inwhich this administration and Israel agree. But when it comes to this nuclear deal, let’s wait until there’s actually a deal on the table thatIran has agreed to, at which point everybody can evaluate it; we don’t have to speculate.  Andwhat I can guarantee is that if it's a deal I’ve signed off on, I will be able to prove that it is thebest way for us to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon. And for us to pass up on that potential opportunity would be a great mistake.  It's not onethat I intend to make, and I will take that case to every member of Congress once we actuallyhave a deal.  I’ll take one question from Julie.  Go ahead. Question:  Now that you’ve had a chance to read the Prime Minister’s remarks at least, doyou feel like the speech he gave was appropriate, considering his upcoming elections and theupcoming deadline?  And you also talked to other foreign leaders today -- the call on Ukraine. Did Iran come up at all, and are you expecting any signs of support from them vis-à-vis yourposition versus the Prime Minister? President Obama:  No.  All the folks on the call today share my position that we should seeif we can get this deal done.  It was not a topic of conversation. With respect to the decisionof the Speaker to offer up the House Chamber two weeks before Mr. Netanyahu’s election tomake this case, I think that question should be directed to Mr. Boehner. As I said, it is veryimportant for us not to politicize the relationship between Israel and the United States.  It'svery important for all of us Americans to realize that we have a system of government inwhich foreign policy runs through the executive branch and the President, not through otherchannels.  
  
And I think it's important for us to stay focused on the problem at hand.  And the specificproblem that is being debated right now is not whether we trust the Iranian regime or not --we don’t trust them.  It's not whether Iran engages in destabilizing activities -- everybodyagrees with that.
The central question is, how can we stop them from getting a nuclear weapon.  And what we know is that if we’re able to get a deal, not only do we cut off all the variouspathways for Iran getting a nuclear weapon, but we also know that we’ll have a verificationmechanism and an inspection mechanism where if they cheat and if they engage in a covertprogram we are far more likely to see it in time to do something about it.  What I also know is if we don’t have a deal, as Prime Minster Netanyahu suggested -- if, infact, he’s right that they’re not trustworthy, they intend to pursue a covert program, and theycheat, we’ll be far less aware of it until it is potentially too late.  What I also know is, is that he made the same argument before this current interim deal, andeven officials in his own government had to acknowledge that Iran has, in fact, maintainedtheir end of the bargain. So what I'm focused on right now is solving this problem.  I’m not focused on the politics of it,I'm not focused on the theater of it.  And my strong suggestion would be that members ofCongress, as they evaluate it, stay similarly focused. All right.  Thank you, guys.
