Good afternoon.  Once again, I want to thank the people of France and President Hollande fortheir extraordinary hospitality.  Hosting nearly 200 nations is an enormous task for anybody,but to do so just two weeks after the terrorist attacks here is a remarkable display of resolve.
And that’s why the first place I visited when I arrived on Sunday night was the Bataclan, sothat I could pay my respects on behalf of the American people -- who share the Frenchpeople’s resolve.  It was a powerful reminder of the awful human toll of those attacks.  Ourhearts continue to go out to the victims’ families.
But here in Paris, we also see the resilience of the universal values that we share -- liberté,égalité, fraternité. And based on my discussions with President Hollande and other leaders, Iam confident that we can continue building momentum -- and adding resources -- to oureffort to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, to disrupt plots against America and our allies,and to bring about the political resolution necessary to resolve the situation in Syria andrelieve the hardships on the Syrian people.
Now, this has been a quick visit.  Of course, all visits to Paris seem quick -- you always wantto stay a little bit longer. But we have accomplished a lot here.  I have high hopes that overthe next two weeks, we’ll accomplish even more.
  
I know some have asked why the world would dedicate some of our focus right now tocombating climate change even as we work to protect our people and go after terroristnetworks.  The reason is because this one trend -- climate change -- affects all trends.  If welet the world keep warming as fast as it is, and sea levels rising as fast as they are, andweather patterns keep shifting in more unexpected ways -- then before long, we are going tohave to devote more and more and more of our economic and military resources not togrowing opportunity for our people, but to adapting to the various consequences of a changingplanet. This is an economic and security imperative that we have to tackle now.  And greatnations can handle a lot at once.
America is already leading on many issues, and climate is no different.  We’ve madesignificant progress at home -- increasing production of clean energy, working to reduceemissions, while our businesses have kept creating jobs for 68 straight months.  And we'vebeen able to lower our unemployment rate to 5 percent in the process.  And since we workedwith China last year to show that the two largest economies and two largest emitters cancooperate on climate, more than 180 countries have followed our lead in announcing theirown targets. The task that remains here in Paris is to turn these achievements into an enduring frameworkfor progress that gives the world confidence in a low-carbon future.  As I said yesterday, whatwe seek is an agreement where progress paves the way for countries to update theiremissions targets on a regular basis, and each nation has the confidence that other nationsare meeting their commitments.  We seek an agreement that makes sure developing nationshave the resources they need to skip the dirty phase of development if they’re willing to dotheir part, and that makes sure the nations most vulnerable to climate change have resourcesto adapt to the impacts we can no longer avoid.
We seek an agreement that gives businesses and investors the certainty that the globaleconomy is on a firm path towards a low-carbon future, because that will spur the kind ofinvestment that will be vital to combine reduced emissions with economic growth.
That’s the goal.  Not just an agreement to roll back the pollution that threatens our planet,but an agreement that helps our economies grow and our people to thrive withoutcondemning the next generation to a planet that is beyond its capacity to repair.
Now, all of this will be hard.  Getting 200 nations to agree on anything is hard.  And I’m surethere will be moments over the next two weeks where progress seems stymied, and everyonerushes to write that we are doomed.  But I’m convinced that we’re going to get big thingsdone here.  Keep in mind, nobody expected that 180 countries would show up in Paris withserious climate targets in hand.  Nobody expected that the price of clean energy would fall asfast as it has, or that back in the United States, the solar industry would be creating jobs 10times faster than the rest of the economy.
  
Nobody expected that more than 150 of America’s biggest companies would pledge theirsupport to an ambitious Paris outcome -- or that a couple dozen of the world’s wealthiestprivate citizens would join us here to pledge to invest unprecedented resources to bring cleanenergy technologies to market faster.
What gives me confidence that progress is possible is somebody like Bill Gates -- who I waswith yesterday -- understands that tackling climate change is not just a moral imperative, it'san opportunity.  Without batting an eye, he said we’re just going to have to go ahead andinvent some new technologies to tackle this challenge.  That kind of optimism, that kind ofsense that we can do what is necessary is infectious.  And you tend to believe somebody likeBill when he says that we’re going to get it done -- since he’s done some pretty remarkablethings.  And I believe that a successful two weeks here could give the world that same kind ofoptimism that the future is ours to shape.
So, with that, I'm going to take a few questions.  We'll start with Jerome Cartillier of [AFP]. Where’s Jerome?
Question:  Good morning, sir, and thank you, Mr. President.  For months now, you’ve beenasking Mr. Putin to play basically a more constructive role in Syria, basically shifting fromdefending Assad to attacking ISIL.  It appears your calls have not been heard.  What’s yourstrategy going forward?
President Obama:  Well, I'm not sure that's true.  The fact that the Vienna process ismoving forward, steadily -- not conclusively, but steadily -- I think is an indication that Mr.Putin recognizes there is not going to be a military resolution to the situation in Syria.
The Russians now have been there for several weeks, over a month, and I think fair-mindedreporters who looked at the situation would say that the situation hasn’t changed significantly. In the interim, Russia has lost a commercial passenger jet.  You’ve seen another jet shotdown.  There have been losses in terms of Russian personnel.  And I think Mr. Putinunderstands that, with Afghanistan fresh in the memory, for him to simply get bogged downin a inconclusive and paralyzing civil conflict is not the outcome that he’s looking for.
Now, where we continue to have an ongoing difference is not on the need for a politicalsettlement; it's the issue of whether Mr. Assad can continue to serve as President while stillbringing the civil war to an end.  It's been my estimation for five years now that that's notpossible.  Regardless of how you feel about Mr. Assad -- and I consider somebody who killshundreds of thousands of his own people illegitimate -- but regardless of the moral equation,as a practical matter, it is impossible for Mr. Assad to bring that country together and to bringall the parties into an inclusive government.  It is possible, however, to preserve the Syrianstate, to have an inclusive government in which the interests of the various groups inside ofSyria are represented.
  
And so, as part of the Vienna process, you're going to see the opposition groups -- themoderate opposition groups that exist within Syria -- some of which, frankly, we don't have alot in common with but do represent significant factions inside of Syria -- they’ll be comingtogether in order for them to form at least a negotiating unit or process that can move Viennaforward.
And we're going to just keep on working at this.  And my hope and expectation is, is thatpolitical track will move at the same time as we continue to apply greater and greaterpressure on ISIL.
And with the contributions that the French have made, the Germans have recently announcedadditional resources to the fight, the Brits have been steady partners in Iraq and I think arenow very interested in how they can expand their efforts to help deal with ISIL inside of Syria-- with not just the cohesion of the coalition the United States put together but also theincreasing intensity of our actions in the air and progressively on the ground, I think it ispossible over the next several months that we both see a shift in calculation in the Russiansand a recognition that it's time to bring the civil war in Syria to a close. It's not going to be easy.  Too much blood has been shed, too much infrastructure has beendestroyed, too many people have been displaced, for us to anticipate that it will be a smoothtransition.  And ISIL is going to continue to be a deadly organization -- because of its socialmedia, the resources that it has and the networks of experienced fighters that it possesses --is going to continue to be a serious threat for some time to come.  But I’m confident that weare on the winning side of this and that, ultimately, Russia is going to recognize the threatthat ISIL poses to its country, to its people, is the most significant, and that they need to alignthemselves with those of us who are fighting ISIL. Justin Sink. Question:  Thanks, Mr. President.  I guess I wanted to follow on that shift in calculation thatyou discussed in terms of President Putin.  Did you receive assurances from either him orPresident Hollande -- who said earlier this week that President Putin had told him he wouldonly target jihadis and ISIS -- that that will be the focus of Russia’s military campaign goingforward?
And then, separately, I just wanted to ask about climate.  The outstanding issue seems to bewhether Republicans who have kind of voiced opposition to your agenda could somehowsubmarine funding for the Green Climate Fund.  That’s a pretty crucial part here.  So I’mwondering both how you prevent that in the upcoming appropriations process, and if you’re atall concerned about what Senator McConnell said earlier today or yesterday that a futureRepublican President could undo what you’re trying to accomplish here in Paris.
  
President Obama:  First of all, on Mr. Putin, I don’t expect that you’re going to see a 180-
turn on their strategy over the next several weeks.  They have invested for years now inkeeping Assad in power.  Their presence there is predicated on propping him up.  And sothat’s going to take some time for them to change how they think about the issue. And solong as they are aligned with the regime, a lot of Russian resources are still going to betargeted at opposition groups that ultimately are going to end up being part of an inclusivegovernment that we support or other members of the coalition support, and are fighting theregime and fighting ISIL at the same time.  So I don’t think we should be under any illusionsthat somehow Russia starts hitting only ISIL targets.  That’s not happening now.  It was neverhappening.  It’s not going to be happening in the next several weeks.
What can happen is if the political process that John Kerry has so meticulously stitchedtogether -- in concert with Foreign Minister Lavrov of Russia -- if that works in Vienna, thenit’s possible, given the existing accord that the parties have already agreed to, that we startseeing at least pockets of ceasefires in and around Syria.  That may mean then that certainopposition groups no longer find themselves subject to either Syrian or Russian bombing; theyare then in a conversation about politics. And slowly, we then are able to get everybody’sattention diverted to where it needs to be, and that is going after ISIL in a systematic way.
With respect to climate and what’s taking place here, I don’t want to get ahead of ourselves --we still need a Paris agreement.  And so my main focus is making sure that the United Statesis a leader in bringing a successful agreement home here in Paris.  And there are a number ofcomponents to it.  So I just want to repeat so that everybody understands what we willconsider success several weeks from now.
Number one, that it is an ambitious target that seeks a low-carbon global economy over thecourse of this century.  That means that countries have put forward specific targets, andalthough those are self-generating, there is a mechanism in which they are presenting to theworld confirmation that they are working on those targets, meeting on those targets.  Sothere’s a single transparency mechanism that all countries are adhering to, and that those arelegally binding; that there’s periodic reviews so that as the science changes and as technologychanges, five years from now, 10 years from now, 15 years from now -- in each successivecycle, countries can update the pledges that they make; and that we’ve got a climate fundthat helps developing countries to not only adapt and mitigate but also leapfrog over dirty-
power generation in favor of clean energy.
And if we hit those targets, then we will have been successful.  Not because, by the way, thepledges alone will meet the necessary targets for us to prevent catastrophic climate change,but because we will have built the architecture that’s needed.  We will have established aglobal consensus of how we’re going to approach the problem.  And then we can successfullyturn up the dials as new sources of energy become available, as the unit costs for somethinglike solar or improvements in battery technology make it easier for us to meet even highertargets.  And systematically, we can drive down carbon emissions and the pace of climatechange over the course of several decades.
  
So I want to emphasize this because I know that in some of the reporting -- if you add up allthe pledges and they were all met right now, we would be at a estimated 2.7 centigradeincrease in temperature.  That’s too high.  We wanted to get 2 centigrade or even lower thanthat.  But if we have these periodic reviews built in, what I believe will happen is that bysending that signal to researchers and scientists and investors and entrepreneurs and venturefunds, we’ll actually start hitting these targets faster than we expected, and we can be evenmore ambitious.  And so when you look at the cumulative targets that may exist 10 yearsfrom now, we may well be within the 2 percent centigrade increase.
And by the way, that’s not just foolish optimism.  When you look at the experience of theUnited States, for example -- I came into office, I prioritized clean energy, I said we’re goingto double our clean energy production.  Through the Recovery Act, we recognized that makingthese big investments were also good for the economy and helping us get out of recession andcould create jobs.  So we made a big investment, and it turned out that we met our goals alot quicker than we expected.
If you had asked me when I first came into office my expectations for the price of solar-
generated power versus traditional coal or other fossil-fuel-generated power, I would say wewould make some progress but that solar would still require substantial subsidies in order tobe economical.  The cost of solar has gone down much faster than any of us would havepredicted even five years ago.
So the key here is to set up the structure so that we’re sending signals all around the world: This is happening.  We’re not turning back.  And the thing about human ingenuity -- I wasgoing to say American ingenuity, but there are other smart folks around too, don’t want to betoo parochial about this -- the thing about human ingenuity is, is that it responds when it getsa strong signal of what needs to be done.
The old expression that necessity is the mother of invention -- well, this is necessary.  And usgetting a strong, high-ambition agreement in place, even if it doesn’t meet all the goals thatwe ultimately need to meet, sends a signal that it’s necessary and that will spur on theinnovation that’s going to ultimately meet our goals.
Nancy Benac.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  One follow-up on the climate change issue.  Are youconfident that you can hold the U.S. to its commitments under existing treaties with no newvote needed? And separately, on Planned Parenthood, I wondered if you could share yourthoughts on that shooting, and any thoughts in the context of the sharp political rhetoric inthe country at this time. 
  
President Obama:  I apologize, Justin, I didn’t address that but, fortunately, Nancy wasbatting cleanup after you. On the issue of the climate fund, we already engage in assistanceto countries for adaptation, mitigation, sharing technology that can help them meet theirenergy needs in a clean way.  And so this is not just one slug of funding that happens in oneyear -- this is multiyear commitments that, in many cases, are already embedded in a wholerange of programs that we have around the world.  And my expectation is, is that we willabsolutely be able to meet our commitments.
This is part of American leadership, by the way.  And this is part of the debate that we have tohave in the United States more frequently.
For some reason, too often in Washington, American leadership is defined by whether or notwe’re sending troops somewhere, and that’s the sole definition of leadership.  And part ofwhat I’ve been trying to describe during the course of my presidency is that where we makethe most impact -- and where, by the way, we strengthen our relationships and influence themost -- is when we are helping to organize the world around a particular problem.
Now, because we’re the largest country, because we have the most powerful military, weshould welcome the fact that we’re going to do more and oftentimes we’re going to do it first. So during the Ebola response, other countries could not respond until we had set up theinfrastructure to allow other countries to respond, and until we had made the call and showedthat we were going to make that investment.
The same was true with respect to making sure that Iran didn’t get a nuclear weapon.  Wehad to lead the way, but, ultimately, because we reached out and brought our allies andpartners together, we were able to achieve goals that we could not have achieved byourselves.
The same is true with climate.  When I made the announcement in Beijing with President Xi, Iwas able to do so in part because we had led domestically, so I could put my money wheremy mouth was, and I said, here are the tough political decisions we’re making, now what areyou going to do?  And once we were able to get China involved that gave confidence to othercountries that we were in a position to make a difference as well -- or that they needed to beinvolved in the process as well.
So whether it’s organizing the coalition that’s fighting ISIL, or dealing with climate change,our role is central, but on large international issues like this, it’s not going to be sufficient -- atleast not if we want it to take, if we want it to sustain itself.  We’ve got to have partners.  Andthat’s the kind of leadership that we should aspire to. With respect to Planned Parenthood,obviously my heart goes out to the families of those impacted.  I mean, Nancy, I say thisevery time we’ve got one of these mass shootings -- this just doesn’t happen in othercountries.
  
We are, rightly, determined to prevent terrorist attacks wherever they occur, whether in theUnited States or with friends and allies like France.  And we devote enormous resources -- andproperly so -- to rooting out networks and debilitating organizations like ISIL, and maintainingthe intelligence and improving the information-sharing that can identify those who would tryto kill innocent people.  And yet, in the United States, we have the power to do more toprevent what is just a regular process of gun homicides that is unequalled by multiples of 5, 6,10. And I think the American people understand that.
So my hope is, is that, once again, this spurs a conversation and action.  And I will continueto present those things that I can do administratively.  But in the end of the day, Congress,states, local governments are going to have to act in order to make sure that we’re preventingpeople who are deranged or have violent tendencies from getting weapons that can magnifythe damage that they do.
And with respect to Planned Parenthood, I think it’s clear -- I’ve said it before -- they providehealth services to women all across the country.  Have for generations.  In many cases, it’sthe only organization that provides health services to impoverished women.  And I think it’sfair to have a legitimate, honest debate about abortion.  I don’t think that’s something that isbeyond the pale of our political discussion; I think it’s a serious, legitimate issue.  How we talkabout it -- making sure that we’re talking about it factually, accurately, and not demonizingorganizations like Planned Parenthood -- I think is important.
Jeff Mason. Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Do you believe that Turkey is doing enough tostrengthen its northwest border with Syria?  How is it that a NATO country with as large amilitary as Turkey has, has not sealed its border?  And is that something that you raised todaywith President Erdogan? And then, to put a finer point on the climate change question, canleaders gathered here believe that the United States will keep its commitments, even afteryou’ve left office, if a Republican succeeds you in the White House? President Obama:  Just with respect to my successor, let me, first of all, say that I’manticipating a Democrat succeeding me.  I’m confident in the wisdom of the American peopleon that front. But even if somebody from a different party succeeded me, one of the thingsthat you find is when you’re in this job, you think about it differently than when you’re justrunning for the job.
And what you realize is what I mentioned earlier, that American leadership involves not justplaying to a narrow constituency back home, but you now are, in fact, at the center of whathappens around the world, and that your credibility and America’s ability to influence eventsdepends on taking seriously what other countries care about. Now, the fact of the matter isthere’s a reason why you have the largest gathering of world leaders probably in humanhistory here in Paris.
  
Everybody else is taking climate change really seriously.  They think it’s a really big problem.It spans political parties.  You travel around Europe, and you talk to leaders of governmentsand the opposition, and they are arguing about a whole bunch of things -- one thing they’renot arguing about is whether the science of climate change is real and whether or not we haveto do something about it. So whoever is the next President of the United States, if they comein and they suggest somehow that that global consensus -- not just 99.5 percent of scientistsand experts, but 99 percent of world leaders -- think this is really important, I think thePresident of the United States is going to need to think this is really important.  And that’swhy it’s important for us to not project what’s being said on a campaign trail, but to do what’sright, and make the case.
And I would note that the American people, I think in the most recent survey, two-thirds ofthem said America should be a signatory to any agreement that emerges that is actuallyaddressing climate change in a serious way.  So the good news is, the politics inside theUnited States is changing, as well.  Sometimes it may be hard for Republicans to supportsomething that I’m doing, but that’s more a matter of the games Washington plays.  Andthat’s why I think people should be confident that we’ll meet our commitments on this.
With respect to Turkey, I have had repeated conversations with President Erdogan about theneed to close the border between Turkey and Syria.  We’ve seen some serious progress onthat front, but there are still some gaps.  In particular, there’s about 98 kilometers that arestill used as a transit point for foreign fighters, ISIL shipping out fuel for sale that helpsfinance their terrorist activities.
And so we have been having our militaries work together to determine how a combination ofair and Turkish ground forces on the Turkish side of the border can do a much better job ofsealing the border than currently is.  And I think President Erdogan recognizes that.  I’m alsoencouraged by the fact that President Erdogan and the EU had a series of meetings around --or Turkey and the EU had a series of meetings around the issue of the Turkish-Greek border.
We have to remind ourselves, Turkey has taken on an enormous humanitarian effort.  Thereare millions of Syrians who are displaced and living inside of Turkey -- not just refugee camps,but they are now moving into major cities throughout Turkey.  That puts enormous strains ontheir infrastructure, on their housing, on employment.  And Turkey has continued to keepthose borders open for people in real need. So I’m proud that the United States is the single-largest contributor of humanitarian aid forSyrian refugees.  I’m glad that the EU is looking to do more to help Turkey manage thoserefugee flows.  But I also think the EU, rightly, wants to see the kind of orderly process alongthe Turkish-Greek border that’s necessary for Europe to be able to regulate the amount ofrefugees it’s absorbing, and to save the lives of refugees who are oftentimes taking enormousrisks because they’re being ferried back and forth by human traffickers who are now operatingin the same ways that you see drug traffickers operating under -- at enormous profit, andwithout regard for human life.
  
 Question:  Did you raise the border issue with him today? President Obama:  We talked about it today, but I guess what I’m saying, Jeff, is this hasbeen an ongoing conversation.  We recognize that this is a central part of our anti-ISILstrategy. We’ve got to choke them off.  We have to choke off how they make money.  We’vegot to choke off their ability to bring in new fighters.  Because we’ve taken tens of thousandsof their fighters off the battlefield, but if new ones are still coming in, then they continue tomaintain a stranglehold over certain population centers inside of Iraq or Syria.  So we’ve gotto cut off their source of new fighters.
That’s also part of the great danger for Europe, and ultimately the United States, as well, andcountries as far-flung as Australia or Singapore.  If you’ve got foreign fighters coming in thatare getting not only ideologically hardened but battle-hardened, and then they’re returning totheir home countries, they’re likely candidates for engaging in the kind of terrorist attacks thatwe saw here in Paris.
So this has been ongoing concern and we’re going to continue to push hard among all ourallies to cut off the financing, cut off the foreign fighters, improve our intelligence-gathering,which has allowed us to accelerate the strikes that we’re taking against ISIL.
A lot of the discussion over the last couple of weeks was the pace of airstrikes.  The pace ofairstrikes is not constrained by the amount of planes or missiles that we have; the pace hasbeen dictated by how many effective targets do we have. And our intelligence continues toimprove.  And the better we get at that, the better we’re going to be at going after them.
Scott Horsley. Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  In terms of sending that market signal you talkedabout today and a couple of times this week, I wonder if you see any political path back hometowards putting an explicit price on carbon. President Obama:  I have long believed that the most elegant way to drive innovation andto reduce carbon emissions is to put a price on it.  This is a classic market failure.  If you openup an Econ101 textbook, it will say the market is very good about determining prices andallocating capital towards its most productive use -- except there are certain externalities,there are certain things that the market just doesn’t count, it doesn’t price, at least not on itsown.  Clean air is an example.  Clean water -- or the converse -- dirty water, dirty air.
In this case, the carbons that are being sent up that originally we didn’t have the science tofully understand -- we do now.  And if that’s the case, if you put a price on it, then the entiremarket would respond.  And the best investments and the smartest technologies would beginscrubbing effectively our entire economy.
  
But it’s difficult.  And so I think that as the science around climate change is more accepted,as people start realizing that even today you can put a price on the damage that climatechange is doing -- you go down to Miami, and when it’s flooding at high tide on a sunny dayand fish are swimming through the middle of the streets, there’s a cost to that.  Insurancecompanies already are beginning to realize that in terms of how they price risk.  And the morethe market on its own starts putting a price on it because of risk, it may be that the politicsaround setting up a cap-and-trade system, for example, shifts as well.
Obviously, I’m not under any illusion that this Congress will impose something like that.  But itis worth remembering that it was conservatives and Republicans and center-right think tanksthat originally figured out this was a smarter way to deal with pollution than a command-and-
control system.  And it was folks like George H.W. Bush and his EPA that effectivelymarshalled this approach to deal with acid raid.  We ended up solving it a lot faster, a lotcheaper than anybody had anticipated.
And I guess, more than anything, that’s the main message I want to send here, is climatechange is a massive problem.  It is a generational problem.  It’s a problem that, by definition,is just about the hardest thing for any political system to absorb, because the effects aregradual, they’re diffuse; people don’t feel it immediately and so there’s not a lot ofconstituency pressure on politicians to do something about it right away, it kind of creeps upon you.  You’ve got the problem of the commons and you’ve got to get everybody doing it --because if just one nation is helping but the other nations aren’t doing it, then it doesn’t doany good -- so you have this huge coordination problem and the danger of free riders. So on all these dimensions, it’s hard to come up with a tougher problem than climate change -
- or a more consequential problem.
And yet, despite all that, the main message I’ve got is, I actually think we’re going to solvethis thing.  If you had said to people as recently as two years ago that we’d have 180countries showing up in Paris with pretty ambitious targets for carbon reduction, most peoplewould have said you’re crazy, that’s a pipe dream.  And yet, here we are.  That’s alreadyhappened.  Before the agreement is even signed, that’s already happened.
As I said earlier, if you had told folks what the cost of generating solar energy would be todayrelative to what it was five years ago, people would have said, not a chance.  And withrelatively modest inputs, that’s already happening.  I mean, imagine if we’re starting to putmore R&D dollars into it -- which is why the Mission Innovation announcement was sosignificant -- the biggest countries, the most prosperous countries doubling their R&D, butthen you’ve also got Bill Gates and other extraordinarily wealthy individuals saying we’regoing to put our money into this.
  
I’m optimistic.  I think we’re going to solve it.  I think the issue is just going to be the paceand how much damage is done before we are able to fully apply the brakes.
And in some ways, it’s akin to the problem of terrorism and ISIL.  In the immediate aftermathof a terrible attack like happened here in Paris, sometimes it’s natural for people to despair. But look at Paris.  You can’t tear down Paris because of the demented actions of a handfulindividuals.  The beauty, the joy, the life, the culture, the people, the diversity -- that’s goingto win out every time.
But we have to be steady in applying pressure to the problem.  We have to keep on going atit.  We have to see what works.  When something doesn’t work, we have to change ourapproach.  But most of all, we have to push away fear, and have confidence that humaninnovation, our values, our judgment, our solidarity -- it will win out.
And I guess I’ve been at this long enough where I have some cause for confidence.  We went,what, a month, month and a half, where people were pretty sure that Ebola was going to killus all?  Well, nobody asks me about it anymore.  And although we still see flickers of it inWest Africa, we set up an entire global health security agenda -- part of American leadership -
- to deal not only with Ebola but to deal with the possibility of future pandemics.  It’s noteasy.  It takes time.  And when you’re in the midst of it, it’s frightening.  But it’s solvable.
All right?  With that, I’m going to go home.  Vive la France!  Thank you very much.
