Let me begin by thanking President Varela and the Panamanian government for theirleadership in hosting this 7th Summit of the Americas.  Mr. President, to you and the peopleof Panama City and all the people of Panama -- thank you for your extraordinary hospitalityand your outstanding arrangements. 
I, too, want to express my thoughts and prayers are with the people of Chile as they’remanaging through a very difficult time.  And I look forward to seeing President Bachelet at afuture summit.
When I came to my first Summit of the Americas six years ago, I promised to begin a newchapter of engagement in this region.  I believed that our nations had to break free from theold arguments, the old grievances that had too often trapped us in the past; that we had ashared responsibility to look to the future and to think and act in fresh ways.  I pledged tobuild a new era of cooperation between our countries, as equal partners, based on mutualinterest and mutual respect.  And I said that this new approach would be sustainedthroughout my presidency; it has, including during this past year.  I’ve met that commitment.
We come together at a historic time.  As has already been noted, the changes that Iannounced to U.S. policy toward Cuba mark the beginning of a new relationship between thepeople of the United States and the people of Cuba.  It will mean, as we’re already seeing,more Americans traveling to Cuba, more cultural exchanges, more commerce, more potentialinvestment.  But most of all, it will mean more opportunity and resources for the Cubanpeople.  And we hope to be able to help on humanitarian projects, and provide more access totelecommunications and the Internet, and the free flow of information. 
  
We continue to make progress towards fulfilling our shared commitments to formallyreestablish diplomatic relations, and I have called on Congress to begin working to lift theembargo that’s been in place for decades.  The point is, the United States will not beimprisoned by the past.  We’re looking to the future and to policies that improve the lives ofthe Cuban people and advance the interests of cooperation in the hemisphere.
This shift in U.S. policy represents a turning point for our entire region.  The fact thatPresident Castro and I are both sitting here today marks a historic occasion.  This is the firsttime in more than half a century that all the nations of the Americas are meeting to addressour future together.  I think it’s no secret -- and President Castro, I’m sure, would agree --that there will continue to be significant differences between our two countries.  We willcontinue to speak out on behalf of universal values that we think are important.  I’m surePresident Castro will continue to speak out on the issues he thinks are important.
But I firmly believe that if we can continue to move forward and seize this momentum inpursuit of mutual interests, then better relations between the United States and Cuba willcreate new opportunities for cooperation across our region -- for the security and prosperityand health and dignity of all our people.
Now, alongside our shift toward Cuba, the United States has deepened our engagement in theAmericas across the board.  Since I took office, we’ve boosted U.S. exports and also U.S.imports from the rest of the hemisphere by over 50 percent.  And that supports millions ofjobs in all of our countries.  I’ve proposed $1 billion to help the people of Central Americastrengthen governance, and improve security and help to spark more economic growth and,most importantly, provide new pathways for young people who too often see their onlyprospects an underground economy that too often leads to violence. 
We’re partnering with countries across the region to develop clean, more affordable andreliable energy that helps nations to combat the urgent threat of climate change, as PresidentRousseff already noted.  Our 100,000 Strong in the Americas initiative is working to bring100,000 students from Latin America to the United States and 100,000 students from theUnited States to Latin America.  The new initiatives that I announced in Jamaica will helpempower a new generation of young people across the Americas with the skills and jobtraining that they need to compete in the global economy.
During the course of my meetings with CARICOM, as well as my meetings with SICA, as wellas the discussions that I’ve had with many of you bilaterally, there have been additional ideasthat we’re very interested in -- finding ways in which we can expand access to the Internetand broadband; how we can structure private-public partnerships to rebuild infrastructureacross the region; and to expand our commercial ties in a broad-based and inclusive way. Because I am firmly of the belief that we will only succeed if everybody benefits from theeconomic growth, not just a few at the top.
  
At home, I've taken executive actions to fix as much of our broken immigration system as Ican, which includes trying to help people come out of the shadows so that they can live andwork in a country that they call home.  And that includes hundreds of thousands of youngpeople we call DREAMers, who have already received temporary relief.  And I’m remainingcommitted to working with our Congress on comprehensive immigration reform.
So the bottom line is this:  The United States is focused on the future.  We’re not caught up inideology -- at least I’m not.  I’m interested in progress and I’m interested in results.  I’m notinterested in theoretic arguments; I’m interested in actually delivering for people.  We aremore deeply engaged across the region than we have been in decades.  And those of youhave interacted with me know that if you bring an issue to my attention, I will do my best totry to address it.  I will not always be able to fix it right away, but I will do my best.
I believe the relationship between the United States and the Americas is as good as it hasever been.  I’m here today to work with you to build on this progress.  Let me just mention afew areas in which I think we can make more progress.
First, we will continue to uphold the Inter-American Democratic Charter, which states that“the peoples of the Americas have a right to democracy.”  I believe our governments,together, have an obligation to uphold the universal freedoms and rights of all our citizens.  Iwant to again commend President Varela and Panama for making civil society groups fromacross the region formal partners in this summit for the first time.  I believe the voices of ourcitizens must be heard.  And I believe going forward, civil society should be a permanent partof these summits.
Second, we have to focus on reigniting economic growth that can fuel progress further inthose communities that have not been reached.  And that means making the Americas morecompetitive.  We still have work to do to harmonize regulations; encourage good governanceand transparency that attracts investment; invest in infrastructure; address some of thechallenges that we have with respect to energy.  The cost of energy in many communities --in many countries, particularly in Central American and the Caribbean, are so high that itpresents a great challenge to economic development, and we think that we can helpparticularly around clean energy issues.
We have to confront the injustice of economic inequality and poverty.  I think that collectivelywe are starting to identify what programs work and which programs do not work.  And weshould put more money in those things that do work, and stop doing those things that don’t. We don’t have money to waste because of too many young people out there with enormousneeds.  I think President Varela is right to focus particularly on education and skills building. And this is an agenda which we should all tackle collectively.
  
Third, we have to keep investing in the clean energy that creates jobs and combats climatechange.  The United States is today leading this global effort, along with many of you.  And Ishould point out that America's carbon pollution is near its lowest level in almost twodecades.  Across the Americas, I think we have the opportunity to expand our clean energypartnerships and increase our investments in renewables.
And finally, we have to stand firm for the security of our citizens.  We must continue to joinwith our partners across the region, especially in Central America, but also in the Caribbean,to promote an approach, a holistic approach that applies rule of law, respects human rights,but also tackles the narco-traffickers that devastate so many communities.  This is a sharedresponsibility.  And I’ve said before that the United States has a responsibility to reduce thedemand for drugs and to reduce the flow of weapons south, even as we partner with you to goafter the networks that can cause so much violence.
So, a new relationship with Cuba.  More trade and economic partnerships that reduce povertyand creates opportunity, particularly focusing on education.  Increased people-to-peopleexchanges.  More investment in our young people.  Clean energy that combats climatechange.  Security cooperation to protect our citizens and our communities.  That’s the newchapter of engagement that the United States is pursuing across the Americas. 
I want to make one last comment addressing some of the points that President Correa raisedand I’m sure will be raised by a few others during this discussion.  I always enjoy the historylessons that I receive when I’m here.  I’m a student of history, so I tend to actually be familiarwith many of these episodes that have been mentioned.  I am the first one to acknowledgethat America’s application of concern around human rights has not always been consistent. And I’m certainly mindful that there are dark chapters in our own history in which we have notobserved the principles and ideals upon which the country was founded. 
Just a few weeks ago, I was in Selma, Alabama celebrating the 50th anniversary of a marchacross a bridge that resulted in horrific violence.  And the reason I was there, and the reasonit was a celebration, is because it was a triumph of human spirit in which ordinary peoplewithout resort to violence were able to overcome systematic segregation.  Their voices wereheard, and our country changed.
America never makes a claim about being perfect.  We do make a claim about being open tochange.  So I would just say that we can, I suppose, spend a lot of time talking about pastgrievances, and I suppose that it’s possible to use the United States as a handy excuse everyso often for political problems that may be occurring domestically.  But that’s not going tobring progress.  That’s not going to solve the problems of children who can’t read, who don’thave enough to eat.  It’s not going to make our countries more productive or morecompetitive in a global economy. 
  
So I just want to make very clear that when we speak out on something like human rights, it’snot because we think we are perfect, but it is because we think the ideal of not jailing peopleif they disagree with you is the right ideal. 
Perhaps President Correa has more confidence than I do in distinguishing between bad pressand good press.  There are a whole bunch of press that I think is bad, mainly because itcriticizes me, but they continue to speak out in the United States because I don’t haveconfidence in a system in which one person is making that determination.  I think that if webelieve in democracy it means that everybody has the chance to speak out and offer theiropinions, and stand up for what they believe is right, and express their conscience, and prayas they would, and organize and assemble as they believe is appropriate -- as long as they’renot operating violently. 
So we will continue to speak out on those issues not because we’re interested in meddling,but because we know from our own history.  It’s precisely because we’re imperfect that webelieve it’s appropriate for us to stand up.  When Dr. King was in jail, people outside theUnited States spoke up on his behalf.  And I would be betraying our history if I did not do thesame. 
The Cold War has been over for a long time.  And I’m not interested in having battles that,frankly, started before I was born.  What I am interested in is solving problems, working withyou.  That’s what the United States is interested in doing.  That’s why we’ve invested so muchin our bilateral relationships, and that’s why I will continue to invest in creating the kind ofspirit of equal partnership and mutual interest and mutual respect upon which I believeprogress can advance.
Thank you very much.
