Good afternoon, everybody.  Please be seated.  I want to thank Dr. Frieden and everybodyhere at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for welcoming me here today.  Tomand his team just gave me an update on the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, our efforts to helpmobilize the international community to fight it, and the steps that we’re taking to keeppeople here at home safe. 
Tom and his team are doing outstanding work.  Between the specialists they have on theground in West Africa and here at headquarters, they’ve got hundreds of professionals whoare working tirelessly on this issue.  This is the largest international response in the history ofthe CDC.  After this, I’ll be meeting with some of these men and women, including some whorecently returned from the front lines of the outbreak.  And they represent public service at itsvery best.  And so I just want them to know how much the American people appreciate them. Many of them are serving far away from home, away from their families.  They are doingheroic work and serving in some unbelievably challenging conditions -- working throughexhaustion, day and night, and many have volunteered to go back.  So we are very, veryproud of them.
  
Their work and our efforts across the government is an example of what happens whenAmerica leads in confronting some major global challenges.  Faced with this outbreak, theworld is looking to us, the United States, and it’s a responsibility that we embrace.  We’reprepared to take leadership on this to provide the kinds of capabilities that only America has,and to mobilize the world in ways that only America can do.  That’s what we’re doing as wespeak. 
First and foremost, I want the American people to know that our experts, here at the CDC andacross our government, agree that the chances of an Ebola outbreak here in the United Statesare extremely low.  We’ve been taking the necessary precautions, including working withcountries in West Africa to increase screening at airports so that someone with the virusdoesn’t get on a plane for the United States.  In the unlikely event that someone with Eboladoes reach our shores, we’ve taken new measures so that we’re prepared here at home. We’re working to help flight crews identify people who are sick, and more labs across ourcountry now have the capacity to quickly test for the virus.  We’re working with hospitals tomake sure that they are prepared, and to ensure that our doctors, our nurses and our medicalstaff are trained, are ready, and are able to deal with a possible case safely.
And here I’ve got to commend everybody at Emory University Hospital.  I just had theopportunity to meet with Doctors Gartland and Ribner and members of their team and thenurses who -- sorry, doctors, but having been in hospitals, I know -- (laughter) -- they’re theones really doing the work.  And I had a chance to thank them for their extraordinary effortsin helping to provide care for the first Americans who recently contracted the disease inAfrica.  The first two of those patients were released last month and continue to improve.  Andit’s a reminder for the American people that, should any cases appear in the United States, wehave world-class facilities and professionals ready to respond.  And we have effectivesurveillance mechanisms in place.  
I should mention, by the way, that I had a chance to see Dr. Brantly in the Oval Office thismorning.  And although he is still having to gain back some weight, he looks great.  He looksstrong and we are incredibly grateful to him and his family for the service that he hasrendered to people who are a lot less lucky than all of us.
As we all know, however, West Africa is facing a very different situation, especially in thehardest hit countries:  Liberia, Sierra Leone, and in Guinea.  Tom and others recently returnedfrom the region, and the scenes that they describe are just horrific.  More than 2,400 men,women and children are known to have died -- and we strongly suspect that the actual deathtoll is higher than that.  Hospitals, clinics and the few treatment centers that do exist havebeen completely overwhelmed.  An already very weak public health system is near collapse inthese countries.  Patients are being turned away, and people are literally dying in the streets.
Now, here’s the hard truth:  In West Africa, Ebola is now an epidemic of the likes that we havenot seen before.  It’s spiraling out of control.  It is getting worse.  It’s spreading faster andexponentially.  Today, thousands of people in West Africa are infected.
  
That number could rapidly grow to tens of thousands.  And if the outbreak is not stopped now,we could be looking at hundreds of thousands of people infected, with profound political andeconomic and security implications for all of us.  So this is an epidemic that is not just a threatto regional security -- it’s a potential threat to global security if these countries break down, iftheir economies break down, if people panic.  That has profound effects on all of us, even ifwe are not directly contracting the disease.
And that’s why, two months ago, I directed my team to make this a national security priority. We’re working this across our entire government, which is why today I’m joined by leadersthroughout my administration, including from my national security team. 
And we’ve devoted significant resources in support of our strategy with four goals in mind. Number one, to control the outbreak.  Number two, to address the ripple effects of localeconomies and communities to prevent a truly massive humanitarian disaster.  Number three,to coordinate a broader global response.  And number four, to urgently build up a publichealth system in these countries for the future -- not just in West Africa but in countries thatdon’t have a lot of resources generally.
Now, this is a daunting task.  But here’s what gives us hope.  The world knows how to fightthis disease.  It’s not a mystery.  We know the science.  We know how to prevent it fromspreading.  We know how to care for those who contract it.  We know that if we take theproper steps, we can save lives.  But we have to act fast.  We can’t dawdle on this one.  Wehave to move with force and make sure that we are catching this as best we can, given that ithas already broken out in ways that we had not seen before.   
So today, I’m announcing a major increase in our response.  At the request of the Liberiangovernment, we’re going to establish a military command center in Liberia to support civilianefforts across the region -- similar to our response after the Haiti earthquake.  It’s going to becommanded by Major General Darryl Williams, commander of our Army forces in Africa.  Hejust arrived today and is now on the ground in Liberia.  And our forces are going to bring theirexpertise in command and control, in logistics, in engineering.  And our Department ofDefense is better at that, our Armed Services are better at that than any organization onEarth. 
We’re going to create an air bridge to get health workers and medical supplies into West Africafaster.  We’re going to establish a staging area in Senegal to help distribute personnel and aidon the ground more quickly.  We are going to create a new training site to train thousands ofhealth workers so they can effectively and safely care for more patients.  Personnel from theU.S. Public Health Service will deploy to the new field hospitals that we’re setting up inLiberia.  And USAID will join with international partners and local communities in a CommunityCare Campaign to distribute supplies and information kits to hundreds of thousands of familiesso they can better protect themselves. 
  
We’re also going to build additional treatment units, including new isolation spaces and morethan 1,000 beds.  And in all our efforts, the safety of our personnel will remain a top priority. Meanwhile, our scientists continue their urgent research in the hope of finding new treatmentsand perhaps vaccines.  And today I’m calling on Congress to approve the funding that we’verequested so that we can carry on with all these critical efforts.     
Today, the United States is doing even more.  But this is a global threat, and it demands atruly global response.  International organizations just have to move faster than they have upuntil this point.  More nations need to contribute experienced personnel, supplies, and fundingthat’s needed, and they need to deliver on what they pledge quickly.  Charities and individualphilanthropists have given generously, and they can make a big difference.  And so we’re notrestricting these efforts to governmental organizations; we also need NGOs and privatephilanthropies to work with us in a coordinated fashion in order to maximize the impact of ourresponse. 
This week, the United States will chair an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council. Next week, I’ll join U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon to continue mobilizing theinternational community around this effort.  And then, at the White House, we’re going tobring more nations together to strengthen our global health security so that we can betterprevent, detect and respond to future outbreaks before they become epidemics. 
This is actually something that we had announced several months ago at the G7 meeting.  Wedetermined that this has to be a top priority; this was before the Ebola outbreak.  Weanticipated the fact that in many of these countries with a weak public health system, if wedon’t have more effective surveillance, more effective facilities on the ground, and are nothelping poor countries in developing their ability to catch these things quickly, that there wasat least the potential of seeing these kinds of outbreaks.  And sadly, we now see that ourpredictions were correct.  It gives more urgency to this effort -- a global health initiative --that we have been pushing internationally.    
Let me just close by saying this:  The scenes that we’re witnessing in West Africa today areabsolutely gut-wrenching.  In one account over the weekend, we read about a family inLiberia.  The disease had already killed the father.  The mother was cradling a sick and listlessfive-year-old son.  Her other son, 10-years-old, was dying, too.  They finally reached atreatment center but they couldn’t get in.  And, said a relative, “We are just sitting.” 
These men and women and children are just sitting, waiting to die, right now.  And it doesn’thave to be this way.     
The reality is that this epidemic is going to get worse before it gets better.  But right now, theworld still has an opportunity to save countless lives.  Right now, the world has theresponsibility to act -- to step up, and to do more.  The United States of America intends to domore.
  
We are going to keep leading in this effort.  We’re going to do our part, and we’re going tocontinue to make sure that the world understands the need for them to step alongside us aswell in order for us to not just save the lives of families like the one I just discussed, butultimately, to make sure that this doesn’t have the kinds of spillover effects that become evenmore difficult to control.
So thank you very much to the entire team that’s already doing this work.  And please knowthat you’ve got your President and Commander-in-Chief behind you. 
Thank you.
