Good morning. It is an honor for me to join this distinguished group of leaders from nationsaround the world. We come here in Copenhagen because climate change poses a grave andgrowing danger to our people. All of you would not be here unless you -- like me -- wereconvinced that this danger is real. This is not fiction, it is science. Unchecked, climate changewill pose unacceptable risks to our security, our economies, and our planet. This much weknow.
The question, then, before us is no longer the nature of the challenge. The question is ourcapacity to meet it. For while the reality of climate change is not in doubt, I have to behonest, as the world watches us today, I think our ability to take collective action is in doubtright now, and it hangs in the balance.
I believe we can act boldly, and decisively, in the face of a common threat. That's why I comehere today -- not to talk, but to act.
Now, as the world's largest economy and as the world's second largest emitter, America bearsour responsibility to address climate change, and we intend to meet that responsibility. That'swhy we've renewed our leadership within international climate change negotiations. That'swhy we've worked with other nations to phase out fossil fuel subsidies.

That's why we've taken bold action at home -- by making historic investments in renewableenergy; by putting our people to work increasing efficiency in our homes and buildings; andby pursuing comprehensive legislation to transform to a clean energy economy.
These mitigation actions are ambitious, and we are taking them not simply to meet globalresponsibilities. We are convinced, as some of you may be convinced, that changing the waywe produce and use energy is essential to America's economic future -- that it will createmillions of new jobs, power new industries, keep us competitive, and spark new innovation.We're convinced, for our own self-interest, that the way we use energy, changing it to a moreefficient fashion, is essential to our national security, because it helps to reduce ourdependence on foreign oil, and helps us deal with some of the dangers posed by climatechange.
So I want this plenary session to understand, America is going to continue on this course ofaction to mitigate our emissions and to move towards a clean energy economy, no matterwhat happens here in Copenhagen. We think it is good for us, as well as good for the world.But we also believe that we will all be stronger, all be safer, all be more secure if we acttogether. That's why it is in our mutual interest to achieve a global accord in which we agreeto certain steps, and to hold each other accountable to certain commitments.
After months of talk, after two weeks of negotiations, after innumerable side meetings,bilateral meetings, endless hours of discussion among negotiators, I believe that the pieces ofthat accord should now be clear.
First, all major economies must put forward decisive national actions that will reduce theiremissions, and begin to turn the corner on climate change. I'm pleased that many of us havealready done so. Almost all the major economies have put forward legitimate targets,significant targets, ambitious targets. And I'm confident that America will fulfill thecommitments that we have made: cutting our emissions in the range of 17 percent by 2020,and by more than 80 percent by 2050 in line with final legislation.
Second, we must have a mechanism to review whether we are keeping our commitments, andexchange this information in a transparent manner. These measures need not be intrusive, orinfringe upon sovereignty. They must, however, ensure that an accord is credible, and thatwe're living up to our obligations. Without such accountability, any agreement would be emptywords on a page.
I don't know how you have an international agreement where we all are not sharinginformation and ensuring that we are meeting our commitments. That doesn't make sense. Itwould be a hollow victory.

Number three, we must have financing that helps developing countries adapt, particularly theleast developed and most vulnerable countries to climate change. America will be a part offast-start funding that will ramp up to $10 billion by 2012. And yesterday, Secretary HillaryClinton, my Secretary of State, made it clear that we will engage in a global effort to mobilize$100 billion in financing by 2020, if -- and only if -- it is part of a broader accord that I havejust described.
Mitigation. Transparency. Financing. It's a clear formula -- one that embraces the principle ofcommon but differentiated responses and respective capabilities. And it adds up to asignificant accord -- one that takes us farther than we have ever gone before as aninternational community.
I just want to say to this plenary session that we are running short on time. And at this point,the question is whether we will move forward together or split apart, whether we preferposturing to action. I'm sure that many consider this an imperfect framework that I justdescribed. No country will get everything that it wants. There are those developing countriesthat want aid with no strings attached, and no obligations with respect to transparency. Theythink that the most advanced nations should pay a higher price. I understand that. There arethose advanced nations who think that developing countries either cannot absorb thisassistance, or that will not be held accountable effectively, and that the world's fastest-
growing emitters should bear a greater share of the burden.
We know the fault lines because we've been imprisoned by them for years. Theseinternational discussions have essentially taken place now for almost two decades, and wehave very little to show for it other than an increased acceleration of the climate changephenomenon. The time for talk is over. This is the bottom line: We can embrace this accord,take a substantial step forward, continue to refine it and build upon its foundation. We can dothat, and everyone who is in this room will be part of a historic endeavor -- one that makeslife better for our children and our grandchildren.
Or we can choose delay, falling back into the same divisions that have stood in the way ofaction for years. And we will be back having the same stale arguments month after month,year after year, perhaps decade after decade, all while the danger of climate change growsuntil it is irreversible.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is no time to waste. America has made our choice. We havecharted our course. We have made our commitments. We will do what we say. Now I believeit's the time for the nations and the people of the world to come together behind a commonpurpose. We are ready to get this done today -- but there has to be movement on all sides torecognize that it is better for us to act than to talk; it’s better for us to choose action overinaction; the future over the past -- and with courage and faith, I believe that we can meetour responsibility to our people, and the future of our planet.
Thank you very much.