Good afternoon.  Since 9/11, more than 80 Americans have been taken hostage by murderousgroups engaged in terrorism or privacy [piracy].  For these innocent men and women --tourists, journalists, humanitarians -- it’s a horror, and cruelty, beyond description.  For theirfamilies and for their friends, it’s an unrelenting nightmare that the rest of us cannot evenbegin to imagine.  
As a government, we should always do everything in our power to bring these Americanshome safe and to support their families.  Dedicated public servants across our governmentwork tirelessly to do so.  Our military personnel risk their lives in dangerous missions, such asthe operation I authorized last year that attempted to rescue Americans held in Syria andYemen.  And there have been successes, such as the rescue of Captain Richard Phillips, heldby Somali pirates, and Jessica Buchanan, rescued from Somalia.    
Of these more than 80 Americans taken hostage since 9/11, more than half have ultimatelycome home, some after many years. Tragically, too many others have not.  And at this verymoment, Americans continue to be held by terrorist groups or detained unjustly by foreigngovernments.  For them, the nightmare goes on -- and so does our work, day and night, toreunite them with their loved ones.
  
As I’ve said before, the terrorist threat is evolving.  The world has been appalled by ISIL’sbarbaric murder of innocent hostages, including Americans.  Moreover, the families ofhostages have told us -- and they’ve told me directly -- about their frequent frustrations in dealing with their own government:  How differentdepartments and agencies aren’t always coordinated.  How there’s been confusion andconflicting information about what the government is prepared to do to help. How they’veoften felt lost in the bureaucracy.  And how, in some cases, families feel that they’ve beenthreatened for exploring certain options to bring their loved ones home.  
That’s totally unacceptable.  As I’ve gotten to know some of these families and heard some ofthese stories, it has been my solemn commitment to make sure that they feel fully supportedin their efforts to get their families home, and that there is a syncing-up of what I know to besincere, relentless efforts within government and the families who obviously have one priorityand one priority only, and that’s getting their loved ones back.
These families have already suffered enough, and they should never feel ignored or victimizedby their own government.  Diane Foley, whose son Jim was killed by ISIL last year, said, “AsAmericans, we can do better.”  I totally agree.  We must do better.  And that’s why I ordereda comprehensive review of our hostage policy.  
I want to thank everybody who contributed to this review -- inside and outside of government,some of whom are here today.  I especially want to thank the former hostages and familieswho contributed.  I’ve come to know some of these families, often under the mostheartbreaking of circumstances.  When her son, Peter -- also known as Abdul-Rahman -- wasbeing held in Syria, his mother Paula Kassig wrote me a letter.  And in it, she described howon clear nights she and her husband would look up at the stars and the moon and wonder if,perhaps, their son might be able to see them, too -- a reminder of the bond they might stillshare.  
I’ve called these families to offer our condolences after they’ve received gut-wrenching newsno parents ever want to hear.  I’ve visited with them.  I've hugged them.  I've grieved withthem.  I just spent time with some of the families, as well as some former hostages here atthe White House.  And needless to say, it was a very emotional meeting.  Some are stillgrieving.  
I thanked them for sharing their experiences and their ideas with our review team.  In fact,many of the changes we’re announcing today are a direct result of their recommendations.  Iacknowledged to them in private what I want to say publicly -- that it is true that there havebeen times where our government, regardless of good intentions, has let them down.  Ipromised them that we can do better.  Here’s how.
  
Today, I’m formally issuing a new presidential policy directive to improve how we work tobring home American hostages and how we support their families.  I’ve signed a newexecutive order to ensure our government is organized to do so.  And we’re releasing the finalreport of our review, which describes the two dozen specific steps that we’re taking.  Broadlyspeaking, they fall into three areas.
First, I’m updating our hostage policy.  I’m making it clear that our top priority is the safe andrapid recovery of American hostages.  And to do so, we will use all elements of our nationalpower.  I am reaffirming that the United States government will not make concessions, suchas paying ransom, to terrorist groups holding American hostages.  And I know this can be asubject of significant public debate.  It’s a difficult and emotional issue, especially for thefamilies.  As I said to the families who are gathered here today, and as I've said to families inthe past, I look at this not just as a President, but also as a husband and a father.  And if myfamily were at risk, obviously I would move heaven and earth to get those loved ones back.
As President, I also have to consider our larger national security.  I firmly believe that theUnited States government paying ransom to terrorists risks endangering more Americans andfunding the very terrorism that we’re trying to stop.  And so I firmly believe that our policyultimately puts fewer Americans at risk.   
At the same time, we are clarifying that our policy does not prevent communication withhostage-takers -- by our government, the families of hostages, or third parties who help thesefamilies.  And, when appropriate, our government may assist these families and privateefforts in those communications -- in part, to ensure the safety of family members and tomake sure that they’re not defrauded.  So my message to these families was simple:  We’renot going to abandon you.  We will stand by you.    
Second, we’re making changes to ensure that our government is better organized around thismission.  Every department that is involved in our national security apparatus cares deeplyabout these hostages, prioritizes them and works really hard.  But they’re not always as wellcoordinated as they need to be.  Under the National Security Council here at the White House,we're setting up a new Hostage Response Group, comprised of senior officials from across ourgovernment who will be responsible for ensuring that our hostage policies are consistent andcoordinated and implemented rapidly and effectively.  And they will be accountable at thehighest levels; they’ll be accountable to me.  
Soon I’ll be designating, as well, a senior diplomat as my Special Presidential Envoy forHostage Affairs, who will be focused solely on leading our diplomatic efforts with othercountries to bring our people home.
At the operational level, we’re creating for the first time one central hub where experts fromacross government will work together, side-by-side, as one coordinated team to find Americanhostages and bring them home safely.
  
In fact, this fusion cell, located at the FBI, is already up and running.  And we’re designating anew official in the intelligence community to be responsible for coordinating the collection,analysis and rapid dissemination of intelligence related to American hostages so we can act onthat intelligence quickly.
Third -- and running through all these efforts -- we are fundamentally changing how ourgovernment works with families of hostages.  Many of the families told us that they at timesfelt like an afterthought or a distraction; that, too often, the law enforcement, or military andintelligence officials they were interacting with were begrudging in giving them information. And that ends today.  I’m making it clear that these families are to be treated like what theyare -- our trusted partners and active partners in the recovery of their loved ones.  We are allon the same team, and nobody cares more about bringing home these Americans than theirown families, and we have to treat them as partners.
So, specifically, our new fusion cell will include a person dedicated to coordinating the supportfamilies get from the government.  This coordinator will ensure that we communicate withfamilies better, with one clear voice, and that families get information that is timely andaccurate.  Working with the intelligence community, we will be sharing more intelligence withfamilies.  
And this coordinator will be the family’s voice within government -- making sure that whendecisions are made about their loved ones, their concerns are front and center.  Everyone whodeals with these families on a regular basis will be given additional training to ensure familiesare treated with the dignity and compassion that they deserve.  In particular, I want to pointout that no family of an American hostage has ever been prosecuted for paying a ransom forthe return of their loved ones.  The last thing that we should ever do is to add to a family’spain with threats like that.
So the bottom line is this:  When it comes to how our government works to recover Americansheld hostage and how we work with their families, we are changing how we do business. Aftereverything they’ve endured, these families are right to be skeptical, and that’s why it’s soimportant -- as I told them today -- that we will be setting up mechanisms to ensureaccountability and implementation.  I’ve directed my national security team to report back tome, including getting feedback from the families to make sure that these reforms are beingput in place and that they are working.  
And in the course of our review, several families told us they wanted to spare other familiesthe frustrations they endured.  Some have even created new organizations to support familieslike theirs or to honor their loved ones, such as the memorial foundation for Steven Sotloff,who wrote, “Everyone has two lives.  The second one begins when you realize you only haveone.”  As a government, and as a nation, we can learn from the example and the strength oftheir lives -- the kind of strength we’ve seen in all these held hostages, including KaylaMueller.    
  
Kayla devoted her life to serving those in need around the world.  To refugees in Syria whohad lost everything, she was a source of comfort and hope.  Before her tragic death, she washeld by ISIL in Syria for a year and a half.  And during her captivity, Kayla managed tosmuggle a letter to her family.  She said, “None of us could have known it would be this longbut I know I am also fighting from my side in the ways that I am able, and I have a lot offight left in me. I am not breaking down and I will not give in no matter how long it takes.”
Today, my message to anyone who harms Americans is that we do not forget.  Our reach islong.  Justice will be done.  My message to every American being held unjustly around theworld who is fighting from the inside to survive another day, my message to their familieswho long to hold them once more, is that the United States of America will never stop workingto reunite you with your family.  We will not give up -- no matter how long it takes.   
Thank you very much, everybody.
