Hello, Memphis! Congratulations to the class of 2011!
Now, I will admit being President is a great job. I have a very nice plane. I have a themesong. But what I enjoy most is having a chance to come to a school like Booker T. WashingtonHigh School and share this day with its graduates. So I could not be more pleased to be here.
We've got some wonderful guests who are here as well, and I just want to make mention ofthem very quickly. First of all, the Governor of Tennessee, Bill Haslam, is here. Please givehim a big round of applause. Three outstanding members of the Tennessee congressionaldelegation, all of whom care deeply about education -- Senator Bob Corker, Senator LamarAlexander, and Congressman Steve Cohen is here. You've got one of Memphis's own, formerCongressman Harold Ford, Jr. is in the house. And the Mayor of Memphis, A.C. Wharton ishere. Please give him a big round of applause.
I am so proud of each and every one of you.
STUDENT: Thank you!
THE PRESIDENT: You're welcome. You made it -- and not just through high school. You madeit past Principal Kiner. I've spent a little bit of time with her now, and you can tell she is notmessing around. I've only been in Memphis a couple of hours, but I'm pretty sure that if shetold me to do something I'd do it.
  
Then I had the chance to meet her mom and her daughter, Amber, a little while back, and wetook a picture. It turns out Amber actually goes to another high school. She was worried thatthe boys would be afraid to talk to her if her mom was lurking in the hallways -- which is whymy next job will be principal at Sasha and Malia's high school. And then I'll be president oftheir college.
Let me also say to Alexis and Vashti -- I heard that you were a little nervous about speakingtoday, but now I'm a little nervous speaking after you, because you both did terrific jobs.We've had some great performances by Shalonda and Tecia and Paula, and the jazz band.Give them a big round of applause.
Last but not least, I want to recognize all the people who helped you to reach this milestone:the parents, the grandparents, the aunts, the uncles, the sisters, the brothers, the friends, theneighbors -- who have loved you and stood behind you every step of the way.Congratulations, family. 
And I want to acknowledge the devoted teachers and administrators at Booker T. Washington,who believed in you -- who kept the heat on you, and have never treated teaching as a job,but rather as a calling.
Every commencement is a day of celebration. I was just telling somebody backstage, I justlove commencements. I get all choked up at commencements. So I can tell you already rightnow, I will cry at my children's commencement. I cry at other people's commencements. Butthis one is especially hopeful. This one is especially hopeful because some people say thatschools like BTW just aren't supposed to succeed in America. You'll hear them say, "Thestreets are too rough in those neighborhoods." "The schools are too broken." "The kids don'tstand a chance." 
We are here today because every single one of you stood tall and said, "Yes, we can." Yes, wecan learn. Yes, we can succeed. You decided you would not be defined by where you comefrom but by where you want to go, by what you want to achieve, by the dreams you hope tofulfill. 
Just a couple of years ago, this was a school where only about half the students made it tograduation. For a long time, just a handful headed to college each year. But at Booker T.Washington, you changed all that. 
You created special academies for ninth graders to start students off on the right track. Youmade it possible for kids to take AP classes and earn college credits. You even had a teamtake part in robotics competition so students can learn with their hands by building andcreating.
  
And you didn't just create a new curriculum, you created a new culture -- a culture that prizeshard work and discipline; a culture that shows every student here that they matter and thattheir teachers believe in them. As Principal Kiner says, the kids have to know that you care,before they care what you know.
And because you created this culture of caring and learning, today we're standing with a verydifferent Booker T. Washington High School. Today, this is a place where more than four outof five students are earning a diploma; a place where 70 percent of the graduates willcontinue their education; where many will be the very first in their families to go to college.
Today, Booker T. Washington is a place that has proven why we can't accept excuses -- anyexcuses -- when it comes to education. In the United States of America, we should neveraccept anything less than the best that our children have to offer. 
As your teacher Steve McKinney -- where's Steve at? There he is. AKA Big Mac. And I see whythey call you Big Mac. As Mr. McKinney said in the local paper, "We need everyone to broadentheir ideas about what is possible. We need parents, politicians, and the media to see howsuccess is possible, how success is happening every day."
So that's why I came here today. Because if success can happen here at Booker T.Washington, it can happen anywhere in Memphis. And if it can happen in Memphis, it canhappen anywhere in Tennessee. And it can happen anywhere in Tennessee, it can happen allacross America.
So ever since I became President, my administration has been working hard to make surethat we build on the progress that's taking place in schools like this. We've got to encouragethe kind of change that's led not by politicians, not by Washington, D.C., but by teachers andprincipals and parents, and entire communities; by ordinary people standing up anddemanding a better future for their children. 
We have more work to do so that every child can fulfill his or her God-given potential. Andhere in Tennessee we've been seeing great progress. Tennessee has been a leader, one of thefirst winners of the nationwide "Race to the Top" that we've launched to reward the kind ofresults you're getting here at Booker T. Washington.
And understand, this isn't just an issue for me. I'm standing here as President because of theeducation that I received. As Chris said, my father left my family when I was two years old.And I was raised by a single mom, and sometimes she struggled to provide for me and mysister. But my mother, my grandparents, they pushed me to excel. They refused to let memake excuses. And they kept pushing me, especially on those rare occasions where I'd slackoff or get into trouble. They weren't that rare, actually. I'm sure nobody here has doneanything like that.
  
I'm so blessed that they kept pushing; I'm so lucky that my teachers kept pushing -- becauseeducation made all the difference in my life. The same is true for Michelle. Education madesuch a difference in her life. Michelle's dad was a city worker, had multiple sclerosis, had towake up every day and it took him a couple hours just to get ready for work. But he went towork every day. Her mom was a secretary, went to work every day, and kept on pushing herjust like my folks pushed me. 
That's what's made a difference in our lives. And it's going to make an even greater differencein your lives -- not just for your own success but for the success of the United States ofAmerica. Because we live in a new world now. Used to be that you didn't have to have aneducation. If you were willing to work hard, you could go to a factory somewhere and get ajob. Those times are passed. Believe it or not, when you go out there looking for a job, you'renot just competing against people in Nashville or Atlanta. You're competing against youngpeople in Beijing and Mumbai. That's some tough competition. Those kids are hungry. They'reworking hard. And you'll need to be prepared for it. 
And as a country, we need all of our young people to be ready. We can't just have someyoung people successful. We've got to have every young person contributing; earning thosehigh school diplomas and then earning those college diplomas, or getting certified in a tradeor profession. We can't succeed without it. 
Through education, you can also better yourselves in other ways. You learn how to learn --how to think critically and find solutions to unexpected challenges. I remember we used to askour teachers, "Why am I going to need algebra?" Well, you may not have to solve for x to geta good job or to be a good parent. But you will need to think through tough problems. You'llneed to think on your feet. You'll need to know how to gather facts and evaluate information.So, math teachers, you can tell your students that the President says they need algebra.
Education also teaches you the value of discipline -- that the greatest rewards come not frominstant gratification but from sustained effort and from hard work. This is a lesson that'sespecially true today, in a culture that prizes flash over substance, that tells us that the goalin life is to be entertained, that says you can be famous just for being famous. You get on areality show -- don't know what you've done -- suddenly you're famous. But that's not goingto lead to lasting, sustained achievement.
And finally, with the right education, both at home and at school, you can learn how to be abetter human being. For when you read a great story or you learn about an importantmoment in history, it helps you imagine what it would be like to walk in somebody else'sshoes, to know their struggles. The success of our economy will depend on your skills, but thesuccess of our community will depend on your ability to follow the Golden Rule -- to treatothers as you would like to be treated. 
  
We've seen how important this is even in the past few weeks, as communities here inMemphis and all across the South have come together to deal with floodwaters, and to helpeach other in the aftermath of terrible tornadoes.
All of these qualities -- empathy, discipline, the capacity to solve problems, the capacity tothink critically -- these skills don't just change how the world sees us. They change how wesee ourselves. They allow each of us to seek out new horizons and new opportunities withconfidence -- with the knowledge that we're ready; that we can face obstacles and challengesand unexpected setbacks. That's the power of your education. That's the power of the diplomathat you receive today.
And this is something that Booker T. Washington himself understood. Think about it. Heentered this world a slave on a Southern plantation. But he would leave this world as theleader of a growing civil rights movement and the president of the world-famous TuskegeeInstitute.
Booker T. Washington believed that change and equality would be won in the classroom. Sohe convinced folks to help him buy farmland. Once he had the land, he needed a school. Sohe assigned his first students to actually build the chairs and the desks and even a couple ofthe classrooms. You thought your teachers were tough. 
Booker T. Washington ran a tight ship. He'd ride the train to Tuskegee and scare some of thenew students. This is before YouTube and TMZ, so the kids didn't recognize him. He'd walk upto them and say, "Oh, you're heading to Tuskegee. I heard the work there is hard. I heardthey give the students too much to do. I hear the food is terrible. You probably won't lastthree months." But the students would reply they weren't afraid of hard work. They weregoing to complete their studies no matter what Booker T. Washington threw at them. And inthat way, he prepared them -- because life will throw some things at you.
The truth is, not a single one of the graduates here today has had it easy. Not a single one ofyou had anything handed to you on a silver platter. You had to work for it. You had to earn it.Most of all, you had to believe in yourselves. 
I think of Chris's stories, and what he's faced in his life: Lost his father to violence at the ageof four. Had a childhood illness that could have been debilitating. But somehow he knew in hisheart that he could take a different path. 
I think of all the graduates here who had to leave their homes when their apartments weretorn down, but who took two buses each morning to come back to Booker T. Washington.
  
I think of Eron Jackon. Where is Eron? Eron has known a lot of setbacks in her young life.There was a period when she lashed out and she got into trouble and she made mistakes. Andwhen she first came to Booker T. Washington, she struggled. Is that right? There are plenty ofpeople out there who would have counted Eron out; a lot of people who would have thought ofher as another statistic. But that's not how the teachers here at Booker T. Washington sawher. And that's not how Eron came to see herself. So she kept coming back to school, and shedidn't give up and she didn't quit. And in time, she became a great student. 
And she remembered what Principal Kiner told her: "You can't let the past get you down. Youhave to let it motivate you." And so now here Eron is, graduating. She's going to keepstudying to get her barber's certificate so she can cut hair and save for college. She's workingtoward her dream to becoming a lawyer. She's got a bright future.
Everybody here has got a unique story like that to tell. Each of you knows what it took for youto get here. But in reaching this milestone, there is a common lesson shared by everygraduate in this hall. And Chris said it himself in a recent interview: "It's not where you are orwhat you are. It's who you are."
Yes, you're from South Memphis. Yes, you've always been underdogs. Nobody has handedyou a thing. But that also means that whatever you accomplish in your life, you will haveearned it. Whatever rewards and joys you reap, you'll appreciate them that much morebecause they will have come through your own sweat and tears, products of your own effortand your own talents. You've shown more grit and determination in your childhoods than a lotof adults ever will. That's who you are. 
So, class of 2011, the hard road does not end here. Your journey has just begun. Yourdiploma is not a free pass. It won't protect you against every setback or challenge or mistake.You'll make some, I promise. You're going to have to keep working hard. You're going to haveto keep pushing yourselves. And you'll find yourselves sometime in situations where folkshave had an easier time, they're a little bit ahead of you, and you're going to have to workharder than they are. And you may be frustrated by that.
But if you do push yourselves, if you build on what you've already accomplished here, then Icouldn't be more confident about your futures. I'm hopeful and I'm excited about what all ofyou can achieve. And I know that armed with the skills and experience and the love thatyou've gained at Booker T. Washington High School, you're ready to make your mark on theworld.
So thank you. Thanks for inspiring me. God bless you. God bless the United States.
