Well, it is wonderful to be back in Colorado.  It is wonderful to be back in Denver.  I want tothank Chief White for that introduction.  You’ve got some outstanding elected officials who arehere today, and I want to acknowledge them.  First of all, a wonderful governor -- JohnHickenlooper is here.  He’s here somewhere.  I know, because I just talked to him.  There heis.  Next to him an outstanding lieutenant governor, Joe Garcia.  One of the finest youngsenators in the country -- Michael Bennet is here.  Terrific members of the House ofRepresentatives -- Ed Perlmutter -- and Dianna Degette.  And your own mayor, MichaelHancock, is here.
I want to say thank you to the Denver Police for having me here, and more importantly, forthe outstanding work that all of you do each and every day to serve your communities andprotect your citizens.
Before I came out here, I had a chance to sit down with some local law enforcement, AttorneyGeneral Holder, and some of the leaders I just mentioned, the wonderful mayor of Aurorawho’s here, sportsmen, parents, loved ones of the victims of the shootings in Columbine andAurora.  And we talked about what we can do to protect more of our citizens from gunviolence.
  
And from the beginning of this effort, we’ve wanted law enforcement front and center inshaping this discussion and the reforms that emerge from it -- because law enforcement livesthis every day.  Law enforcement are the first to see the terrible consequences of any kind ofviolence, certainly gun violence -- lives lost, families broken, communities that are changedforever.  They’re very often in the line of fire.  The law enforcement knows what works andwhat doesn’t, and so we wanted that experience and that advice.
And it was also important for us to hear from mayors like Steve Hogan, because he’s been onthe front lines having to deal with these issues under incredibly sad circumstances.  And I’vecome to Denver today in particular because Colorado is proving a model of what’s possible.
It’s now been just over 100 days since the murder of 20 innocent children and six braveeducators in Newtown, Connecticut -- an event that shocked this country and I thinkgalvanized parents all across the country to say, we’ve got to do something more to protectour kids.  But consider this:  Over those 100 days or so, more than 100 times as manyAmericans have fallen victim to gun violence.  More than 2,000 of our fellow citizens, struckdown, often because they were just going about their daily round.  They weren’t doinganything special.  Just doing what folks do every day -- shopping, going to school.  Every daythat we wait to do something about it, even more of our fellow citizens are stolen from ourlives by a bullet from a gun.
Now, the good news is Colorado has already chosen to do something about it.  Look, this is astate that has suffered the tragedy of two of the worst mass shootings in our history -- 14years ago this month in Columbine, and just last year in Aurora.  But this is also a state thattreasures its Second Amendment rights -- the state of proud hunters and sportsmen.  And, bythe way, the Governor wanted me to remind everybody that there is outstanding elk huntinghere in Colorado.  There’s a strong tradition of gun ownership that’s handed down fromgeneration to generation, and it’s part of the fabric of people’s lives.  And they treat gunownership with reverence and respect.
And so I’m here because I believe there doesn't have to be a conflict in reconciling theserealities.  There doesn’t have to be a conflict between protecting our citizens and protectingour Second Amendment rights.  I’ve got stacks of letters in my office from proud gun owners,whether they’re for sport, or protection, or collection, who tell me how deeply they cherishtheir rights, don’t want them infringed upon, but they still want us to do something to stop theepidemic of gun violence.  And I appreciate every one of those letters.  And I’ve learned fromthem.
And I think that Colorado has shown that practical progress is possible thanks to theleadership of Governor Hickenlooper and some of the state legislators who are here today. When I was talking to Steve, he mentioned that Aurora is very much a purple city.  It’s got amajority Republican city council; a majority of the state legislators are Democrat.
  
But they came together understanding that out of this tragedy there had to be something thatmade sense.  And so we’ve seen enacted tougher background checks that won’t infringe onthe rights of responsible gun owners, but will help keep guns out of the hands of dangerouspeople.
Now, in January, just a few weeks after Newtown, I put forward a series of common-senseproposals along the same lines as what’s passed here in Colorado, to reduce gun violence andkeep our kids safe.  In my State of the Union address, I urged Congress to give theseproposals a vote.  And, by the way, before we even asked for a vote, I had already signednumerous executive orders doing what we could administratively to make sure that guns don'tfall into the hands of the wrong people.
But what I said then is still true:  If we're really going to tackle this problem seriously, thenwe've got to get Congress to take the next step.  And as soon as next week, they will bevoting.  As soon as next week, every senator will get to vote on whether or not we shouldrequire background checks for anyone who wants to purchase a gun.
Now, some say, well, we already have background checks.  And they're right.  Over the past20 years, those background checks have kept more than 2 million dangerous people frombuying a gun.  But the loopholes that currently exist in the law have allowed way too manycriminals and folks who shouldn’t be getting guns -- it has allowed them to avoid backgroundchecks entirely.  That makes it harder for law enforcement to do its job.  It's not safe.  It's notsmart.  And, by the way, it's not fair to responsible gun owners who are playing by the rules.
Now, understand, nobody is talking about creating an entirely new system.  We are simplytalking about plugging holes, sealing a porous system that isn't working as well as it should. If you want to buy a gun, whether it's from a licensed dealer or a private seller, you should atleast have to pass a background check to show you're not a criminal or someone legallyprohibited from buying on.  And that’s just common sense.
During our roundtable discussion with Governor Hickenlooper, who I know was in the midst ofthis passionate debate about the legislation here in Colorado, and some people said, well,background checks aren't going to stop everybody.  And the Governor was the first one toacknowledge, yes, they won't stop everybody, but as he pointed out, statistically, there are awhole bunch of folks who have been stopped.
As a consequence of background checks, law enforcement has been able to stop people whohave been convicted of murder from getting a gun, people who are under restraining ordersfor having committed violent domestic abuse from getting a gun.  In a couple of cases thegovernor mentioned to me, law enforcement has actually been able to arrest people whocame to pick up their gun -- because they were criminals, wanted.
  
So this does work.  And, by the way, if you’re selling a gun, wouldn’t you want to know whoyou’re selling it to?  Wouldn’t you want to know?  Wouldn’t you want in your conscience toknow that the person you’re selling to isn’t going to commit a crime?
So these enhanced background checks won’t stop all gun crimes, but they will certainly helpprevent some.  This is common sense.  And, by the way, most gun owners -- more than 80percent -- agree this makes sense.  More than 70 percent of NRA members agree.  Ninetypercent of the American people agree.  So there’s no reason we can’t do this unless politics isgetting in the way.  There’s no reason we can’t do this.
As soon as next week, every senator will get a chance to vote on a proposal to helpstrengthen school safety and help people struggling with mental health problems get thetreatment that they need.
As soon as next week, every senator will get to vote on whether or not we should crack downon folks who buy guns as part of a scheme to arm criminals.  That would keep more guns offthe streets and out of the hands of people who are intent on doing harm.  And it would makelife a whole lot easier and safer for the people behind me -- police officers.
Every senator will get a say on whether or not we should keep weapons of war and high-
capacity ammunition magazines that facilitate mass killings off our streets.  The type ofassault rifle used in Aurora, for example, when paired with a high-capacity magazine, has onepurpose:  to pump out as many bullets as possible, as fast as possible.  It’s what allowed thatgunman to shoot 70 people and kill 12 in a matter of a few minutes.  I don’t believe thatweapons designed for theaters of war have a place in movie theaters.  Most Americans agreewith that.
Most of these ideas are not controversial.  Right now, 90 percent of Americans -- 90 percent -
- support background checks that will keep criminals and people who have been found to be adanger to themselves or others from buying a gun.  More than 80 percent of Republicansagree.  Most gun owners agree.  Think about it:  How often do 90 percent of Americans agreeon anything?
And yet, there are already some senators back in Washington floating the idea that theymight use obscure procedural stunts to prevent or delay any of these votes on reform.  Thinkabout that.  They’re not just saying they’ll vote “no” on the proposal that most Americanssupport.  They’re saying they’ll do everything they can to avoid even allowing a vote on aproposal that the overwhelming majority of the American people support.  They’re saying youropinion doesn’t matter.
We knew from the beginning that change wouldn’t be easy.  And we knew that there would bepowerful voices that would do everything they could to run out the clock, change the subject,ignore the majority of the American people.
  
We knew they’d try to make any progress collapse under the weight of fear and frustration, ormaybe people would just stop paying attention.
The only way this time will be different is if the American people demand that this time it mustbe different -- that this time, we must do something to protect our communities and our kids. We need parents, we need teachers, we need police officers, we need pastors, we needhunters and sportsmen, Americans of every background to say, we’ve suffered too much painand care too much about our children to allow this to continue.  We’re not going to just waitfor the next Newtown or the next Aurora before we act.  And I genuinely believe that’s whatthe overwhelming majority of Americans -- I don’t care what party they belong to -- that’swhat they want.  They just want to see some progress.
It was interesting, during the conversation, a number of people talked about the trust issue. Part of the reason it's so hard to get this done is because both sides of the debate sometimesdon't listen to each other.  The people who take absolute positions on these issues, on bothsides, sometimes aren't willing to concede even an inch of ground.
And so one of the questions we talked about was, how do you build trust?  How do you rebuildsome trust?  And I told the story about two conversations I had.  The first conversation waswhen Michelle came back from doing some campaigning out in rural Iowa.  And we weresitting at dinner, and she had been to like a big county, a lot of driving out there, a lot offarmland.  And she said, if I was living out in a farm in Iowa, I'd probably want a gun, too.  Ifsomebody just drives up into your driveway and you're not home -- you don't know who thesepeople are and you don't know how long it's going to take for the sheriffs to respond.  I cansee why you'd want some guns for protection.  That's one conversation.
I had another conversation just a couple of months ago with a mom from Chicago -- actually,Evanston, Illinois -- whose son had been killed in a random shooting.  And she said, youknow, I hate it when people tell me that my son was shot because he was in the wrong placeat the wrong time.  He was in the right place.  He was on his way to school.  He wasn't in thewrong place.  He was exactly where he was supposed to be.
Now, both those things are true.  And sometimes we're so divided between rural and urban,and folks whose hunting is part of their lives and folks whose only experience with guns isstreet crime.  And the two sides just talk past one another.  And more than anything, what Iwant to just emphasize is there are good people on both sides of this thing, but we have to beable to put ourselves in the other person's shoes.  If you're a hunter, if you're a sportsman --if you have a gun in your house for protection -- you've got to understand what it feels like forthat mom whose son was randomly shot.
And if you live in an urban area and you're worried about street crime, you've got tounderstand what it might be like if you grew out on a ranch and your dad had been taking youhunting all your life.  And we had a couple of sportsmen in our conversation today, and Ithought one of them said something very important.
  
He said, all my experiences with guns have been positive, but I realize that for others, all theirexperiences about guns have been negative.  Well, that's a start, right?  If we start listeningto each other, then we should be able to get something done that's constructive.  We shouldbe able to get that done.
One last thing I’m going to mention is that during this conversation -- I hope you don't mindme quoting you, Joe.  Joe Garcia, I thought, also made an important point, and that is thatthe opponents of some of these common-sense laws have ginned up fears among responsiblegun owners that have nothing to do with what’s being proposed and nothing to do with thefacts, but feeds into this suspicion about government.
You hear some of these quotes:  “I need a gun to protect myself from the government.”  “Wecan't do background checks because the government is going to come take my guns away.”
Well, the government is us.  These officials are elected by you.  They are elected by you.  Iam elected by you.  I am constrained, as they are constrained, by a system that our Foundersput in place.  It’s a government of and by and for the people.
And so, surely, we can have a debate that's not based on the notion somehow that yourelected representatives are trying to do something to you other than potentially preventanother group of families from grieving the way the families of Aurora or Newtown orColumbine have grieved.  We’ve got to get past some of the rhetoric that gets perpetuatedthat breaks down trust and is so over the top that it just shuts down all discussion.  And it’simportant for all of us when we hear that kind of talk to say, hold on a second.  If there areany folks who are out there right now who are gun owners, and you’ve been hearing thatsomehow somebody is taking away your guns, get the facts.  We’re not proposing a gunregistration system, we’re proposing background checks for criminals.
Don't just listen to what some advocates or folks who have an interest in this thing aresaying.  Look at the actual legislation.  That's what happened here in Colorado.  Andhopefully, if we know the facts and we’re listening to each other, then we can actually moveforward.
And that’s what members of Congress need to hear from you.  Right now, members ofCongress are at home in their districts.  Many of them are holding events where they can hearfrom their constituents.  So I'm asking anyone out there who is listening today, find out whereyour member of Congress stands on these issues.  If they're not part of the 90 percent ofAmericans who agree on background checks, then ask them why not.  Why wouldn’t you wantto make it more difficult for a dangerous criminal to get his or her hands on a gun?  Whywouldn’t you want to close the loophole that allows too many criminals to buy a gun withouteven the simplest of background checks?  Why on Earth wouldn’t you want to make it easierrather than harder for law enforcement to do their job?
  
I know that some of the officers here today know what it's like to look into the eyes of aparent or a grandparent, a brother or a sister, or a spouse who has just lost a loved one to anact of violence.  Some of those families, by the way, are here today.  And as police officers,you know as well as anybody, there is no magic solution to prevent every bad thing fromhappening in the world.  You still suit up, you put on your badge, put yourself at risk everysingle day.  Every single day, you go to work and you try to do the best you can to protect thepeople you're sworn to protect and serve.  Well, how can the rest of us as citizens do anythingless?
If there is just one step we can take to prevent more Americans from knowing the pain thatsome of the families who are here have known, don’t we have an obligation to try?  Don’t wehave an obligation to try?  If these reforms keep one person from murdering dozens ofinnocent children or worshippers or moviegoers in a span of minutes, isn't it worth fightingfor? I believe it is.  That’s why I'm going to keep on working.  I'm going to keep on giving itmy best efforts.  But I'm going to need your help.
This is not easy.  And I'll be blunt -- a lot of members of Congress, this is tough for them. Because those who are opposed to any form of legislation affecting guns, they're very well-
organized and they're very well-financed.  But it can be done if enough voices are heard.
So I want to thank all the police officers who are here for giving their best efforts every singleday.  I want to thank Governor Hickenlooper for his outstanding leadership.  I want to thankall the families who are here for your courage in being willing to take out of this tragedysomething positive.  I want to thank the people of Colorado for coming together in sensibleways.  Let's see if we can get the whole country to do so.
Thank you, Denver.  God bless you.  And God bless the United States of America.
