Well, thank you, Leon, and thank you, Jim.
When I chose Leon Panetta as Director of the CIA, I said he was going to be a strong advocatefor this agency and would strengthen your capabilities to meet the threats of our time. Andwhen I chose Jim Clapper as Director of National Intelligence, I charged him with making surethat our intelligence community works as one integrated team. That’s exactly what these twoleaders have done, along with all of you.
So, Jim and Leon, thank you for your remarkable leadership, not just in recent weeks, butduring the entirety of your tenure. You have done a great job.
This is my third visit here to Langley as President, and each of these visits has markedanother milestone in our mission to protect the American people and keep our country safe.
On my first visit, just months after taking office, I stood here and I said that this agency andour entire intelligence community is fundamental to America’s national security. I said that Ibelieved that your best days were still to come and I pledged that you would have my fullsupport to carry out your critical work.
Soon after that visit, I called Leon into the Oval Office and I directed him to make the killingor capture of Osama bin Laden the top priority in our war to defeat al Qaeda. And he cameback here, and you guys, who had already been working so hard on this issue, redoubled yourefforts. And that was true all across the intelligence community.
  
My second visit, a year later, came under more somber circumstances. We gathered to paytribute to seven American patriots who gave their lives in this fight at a remote post inAfghanistan. As has already been mentioned, their stars now grace this memorial wall. Andthrough our grief and our tears, we resolved that their sacrifice would be our summons tocarry on their work, to complete this mission, to win this war.
Today I’ve returned just to say thank you, on behalf of all Americans and people around theworld, because you carried on. You stayed focused on your mission. You honored the memoryof your fallen colleagues. And in helping to locate and take down Osama bin Laden, you madeit possible for us to achieve the most significant victory yet in our war to defeat al Qaeda.
I just met with some of the outstanding leaders and teams from across the community whoworked so long and so hard to make that raid a success. And I’m pleased today that we’rejoined by representatives from all of our intelligence agencies, and that folks are watching thislive back at all of those agencies, because this truly was a team effort. That’s not always thecase in Washington. But all of you work together every single day.
This is one of the few times when all these leaders and organizations have the occasion toappear together publicly. And so I thank all of you for coming -- because I think it’s soimportant for the American people to see all of you here today.
Part of the challenge of intelligence work is, by necessity, your work has to remain secret. Iknow that carries a heavy burden. You’re often the first ones to get the blame when things gowrong, and you’re always the last ones to get the credit when things go right. So when thingsdo go right -- and they do more often than the world will ever know -- we ought to celebrateyour success.
That’s why I came here. I wanted every single one of you to know, whether you work at theCIA or across the community, at every step of our effort to take out bin Laden, the work youdid and the quality of the intelligence that you provided made the critical difference -- to me,to our team on those helicopters, to our nation.
After I directed that getting bin Laden be the priority, you hunkered down even more, buildingon years of painstaking work; pulling together, in some cases, the slenderest of intelligencestreams, running those threads to ground until you found that courier and you tracked him tothat compound. And when I was briefed last summer, you had built the strongest intelligencecase against -- in terms of where bin Laden was since Tora Bora.
In the months that followed, including all those meetings in the Situation Room, we did whatsound intelligence demands: We pushed for more collection. We pushed for more evidence.We questioned our assumptions. You strengthened your analysis. You didn’t bite your tongueand try to spin the ball, but you gave it to me straight each and every time.
  
And we did something really remarkable in Washington -- we kept it a secret. That’s how itshould be.
Of course, when the time came to actually make the decision, we didn’t know for sure that binLaden was there. The evidence was circumstantial and the risks, especially to the lives of ourspecial operations forces, were huge. And I knew that the consequences of failure could beenormous. But I made the decision that I did because I had absolute confidence in the skill ofour military personnel and I had confidence in you. I put my bet on you. And now the wholeworld knows that that faith in you was justified.
So just as impressive as what you did was how you did it. It was a tribute to yourperseverance, your relentless focus and determination over many years. For the fight againstal Qaeda did not begin on 9/11. Among you are veterans who’ve been pursuing thesemurderers for many years, even before they attacked our embassies in Africa and struck the[USS] Cole in Yemen. Among you are young men and women for whom 9/11 was a call toservice. This fight has defined your generation. And on this wall are stars honoring all yourcolleagues and friends, more than a dozen who have given their lives in the fight against alQaeda and its violent allies.
As the years wore on, others began to think that this terrorist might never be brought tojustice. But you never quit. You never gave up. You pulled together across this agency andacross the community.
No one piece of information and no one agency made this possible. You did it together -- CIA,National Security Agency, National Reconnaissance Office, the National Geospatial IntelligenceAgency, everyone at ODNI and the National Counterterrorism Center. Folks across thecountry, civilian and military, so many of you here today.
And that’s exactly how our intelligence community is supposed to work, using every capability-- human, technical -- collecting, analyzing, sharing, integrating intelligence, and then actingon it.
That’s what made this one of the greatest intelligence successes in American history, andthat’s why intelligence professionals are going to study and be inspired by your achievementfor generations to come.
Now, make no mistake -- this is not over. Because we not only took out the symbol andoperational leader of al Qaeda, we walked off with his files -- the largest treasure trove ofintelligence ever seized from a terrorist leader. Many of you now are working around theclock; you didn’t have much time to celebrate. We’ve got to analyze and evaluate and exploitthis mountain of intelligence.
  
So today, every terrorist in the al Qaeda network should be watching their back, becausewe’re going to review every video, we are going to examine every photo, we’re going to readevery one of those millions of pages, we’re going to pursue every lead. We are going to gowherever it takes us. We’re going to finish the job. We are going to defeat al Qaeda.
Even as we stay focused on this mission, we need you to stay nimble and flexible to meet thefull range of threats to our security, from plots against our homeland to nations seekingweapons of mass destruction to transnational threats such as cyber criminals and narco-
trafficers.
So I’m going to keep relying on you -- for your intelligence, the analysis that comes across mydesk every single day. And 300-plus [million] Americans are counting on you to stay a stepahead of our adversaries and to keep our country safe.
I have never been more proud or more confident in you than I am today -- not just becausethis extraordinary success, but because it reminds us of who we are as a people and as anation. You reminded us that when we Americans set our mind to something, when we arefocused and when we are working together, when we’re not worried about who’s getting thecredit and when we stay true to our values, even if it takes years, there is nothing we cannotdo.
That’s why I still believe in what I said my first visit here two years ago: Your greatest daysare still to come. And if any of you doubt what this means, I wish I could have taken some ofyou on the trip I made to New York City, where we laid a wreath at Ground Zero, and I had achance to meet firefighters who had lost an entire shift; police officers who had lost theircomrades; a young woman, 14 years old, who had written to me because her last memory ofher father was talking to him on the phone while her mother wept beside her, right beforethey watched the tower go down.
And she and other members of families of 9/11 victims talked about what this meant. Itmeant that their suffering had not been forgotten, and that the American community standswith them, that we stand with each other.
So most of you will never get headlines for the work that you do. You won’t get ticker-tapeparades. But as you go about your work with incredible diligence and dedication every singleday, I hope all of you understand how important it is, how grateful I am, and that you havethe thanks of a grateful nation.
God bless you.
And God bless the United States of America.
Thank you.
