To President Frederick, the Board of Trustees, faculty and staff, fellow recipients of honorarydegrees, thank you for the honor of spending this day with you.  And congratulations to theClass of 2016!  Four years ago, back when you were just freshmen, I understand many of youcame by my house the night I was reelected.   So I decided to return the favor and come byyours.
To the parents, the grandparents, aunts, uncles, brothers, sisters, all the family and friendswho stood by this class, cheered them on, helped them get here today -- this is your day, aswell.  Let’s give them a big round of applause, as well.     
I’m not trying to stir up any rivalries here; I just want to see who’s in the house.  We gotQuad?   Annex.  Drew.  Carver.  Slow.  Towers.  And Meridian.   Rest in peace, Meridian.  Restin peace. 
I know you’re all excited today.  You might be a little tired, as well.  Some of you were up allnight making sure your credits were in order.    Some of you stayed up too late, ended up atHoChi at 2:00 a.m.   Got some mambo sauce on your fingers.   
  
But you got here.  And you've all worked hard to reach this day.  You’ve shuttled betweenchallenging classes and Greek life.  You've led clubs, played an instrument or a sport.  Youvolunteered, you interned.  You held down one, two, maybe three jobs.  You've made lifelongfriends and discovered exactly what you’re made of.  The “Howard Hustle” has strengthenedyour sense of purpose and ambition. 
Which means you're part of a long line of Howard graduates.  Some are on this stage today. Some are in the audience.  That spirit of achievement and special responsibility has definedthis campus ever since the Freedman’s Bureau established Howard just four years after theEmancipation Proclamation; just two years after the Civil War came to an end.  They createdthis university with a vision -- a vision of uplift; a vision for an America where our fates wouldbe determined not by our race, gender, religion or creed, but where we would be free -- inevery sense -- to pursue our individual and collective dreams.
It is that spirit that's made Howard a centerpiece of African-American intellectual life and acentral part of our larger American story.  This institution has been the home of many firsts: The first black Nobel Peace Prize winner.  The first black Supreme Court justice.  But itsmission has been to ensure those firsts were not the last.  Countless scholars, professionals,artists, and leaders from every field received their training here.  The generations of men andwomen who walked through this yard helped reform our government, cure disease, grow ablack middle class, advance civil rights, shape our culture.  The seeds of change -- for allAmericans -- were sown here.  And that’s what I want to talk about today.
As I was preparing these remarks, I realized that when I was first elected President, most ofyou -- the Class of 2016 -- were just starting high school.  Today, you’re graduating college.  Iused to joke about being old.  Now I realize I'm old.    It's not a joke anymore.   
But seeing all of you here gives me some perspective.  It makes me reflect on the changesthat I’ve seen over my own lifetime.  So let me begin with what may sound like acontroversial statement -- a hot take.
Given the current state of our political rhetoric and debate, let me say something that may becontroversial, and that is this:  America is a better place today than it was when I graduatedfrom college.    Let me repeat:  America is by almost every measure better than it was when Igraduated from college.  It also happens to be better off than when I took office -- but that's alonger story.    That's a different discussion for another speech. 
  
But think about it.  I graduated in 1983.  New York City, America’s largest city, where I livedat the time, had endured a decade marked by crime and deterioration and near bankruptcy. And many cities were in similar shape.  Our nation had gone through years of economicstagnation, the stranglehold of foreign oil, a recession where unemployment nearly scraped 11percent.  The auto industry was getting its clock cleaned by foreign competition.  And don’teven get me started on the clothes and the hairstyles.  I've tried to eliminate all photos of mefrom this period.  I thought I looked good.    I was wrong. 
Since that year -- since the year I graduated -- the poverty rate is down.  Americans withcollege degrees, that rate is up.  Crime rates are down.  America’s cities have undergone arenaissance.  There are more women in the workforce.  They’re earning more money.  We’vecut teen pregnancy in half.  We've slashed the African American dropout rate by almost 60percent, and all of you have a computer in your pocket that gives you the world at the touchof a button.  In 1983, I was part of fewer than 10 percent of African Americans who graduatedwith a bachelor’s degree.  Today, you’re part of the more than 20 percent who will.  And morethan half of blacks say we’re better off than our parents were at our age -- and that our kidswill be better off, too.
So America is better.  And the world is better, too.  A wall came down in Berlin.  An IronCurtain was torn asunder.  The obscenity of apartheid came to an end.  A young generation inBelfast and London have grown up without ever having to think about IRA bombings.  In justthe past 16 years, we’ve come from a world without marriage equality to one where it’s areality in nearly two dozen countries.  Around the world, more people live in democracies. We’ve lifted more than 1 billion people from extreme poverty.  We’ve cut the child mortalityrate worldwide by more than half. 
America is better.  The world is better.  And stay with me now -- race relations are bettersince I graduated.  That’s the truth.  No, my election did not create a post-racial society.  Idon’t know who was propagating that notion.  That was not mine.    But the election itself --and the subsequent one -- because the first one, folks might have made a mistake.    Thesecond one, they knew what they were getting.  The election itself was just one indicator ofhow attitudes had changed. 
In my inaugural address, I remarked that just 60 years earlier, my father might not havebeen served in a D.C. restaurant -- at least not certain of them.  There were no black CEOs ofFortune 500 companies.  Very few black judges.  Shoot, as Larry Wilmore pointed out lastweek, a lot of folks didn’t even think blacks had the tools to be a quarterback.  Today, formerBull Michael Jordan isn’t just the greatest basketball player of all time -- he owns the team.   
  
When I was graduating, the main black hero on TV was Mr. T.    Rap and hip hop werecounterculture, underground.  Now, Shonda Rhimes owns Thursday night, and Beyoncé runsthe world.    We’re no longer only entertainers, we're producers, studio executives.  No longersmall business owners -- we're CEOs, we’re mayors, representatives, Presidents of the UnitedStates.   
I am not saying gaps do not persist.  Obviously, they do.  Racism persists.  Inequalitypersists.  Don’t worry -- I’m going to get to that.  But I wanted to start, Class of 2016, byopening your eyes to the moment that you are in.  If you had to choose one moment inhistory in which you could be born, and you didn’t know ahead of time who you were going tobe -- what nationality, what gender, what race, whether you’d be rich or poor, gay or straight,what faith you'd be born into -- you wouldn’t choose 100 years ago.  You wouldn’t choose thefifties, or the sixties, or the seventies.  You’d choose right now.  If you had to choose a timeto be, in the words of Lorraine Hansberry, “young, gifted, and black” in America, you wouldchoose right now.   
I tell you all this because it's important to note progress.  Because to deny how far we’vecome would do a disservice to the cause of justice, to the legions of foot soldiers; to not onlythe incredibly accomplished individuals who have already been mentioned, but your mothersand your dads, and grandparents and great grandparents, who marched and toiled andsuffered and overcame to make this day possible.  I tell you this not to lull you intocomplacency, but to spur you into action -- because there’s still so much more work to do, somany more miles to travel.  And America needs you to gladly, happily take up that work.  Youall have some work to do.  So enjoy the party, because you're going to be busy.   
Yes, our economy has recovered from crisis stronger than almost any other in the world.  Butthere are folks of all races who are still hurting -- who still can’t find work that pays enough tokeep the lights on, who still can’t save for retirement.  We’ve still got a big racial gap ineconomic opportunity.  The overall unemployment rate is 5 percent, but the blackunemployment rate is almost nine.  We’ve still got an achievement gap when black boys andgirls graduate high school and college at lower rates than white boys and white girls.  HarrietTubman may be going on the twenty, but we’ve still got a gender gap when a black womanworking full-time still earns just 66 percent of what a white man gets paid.   
We’ve got a justice gap when too many black boys and girls pass through a pipeline fromunderfunded schools to overcrowded jails.
  
This is one area where things have gotten worse.  When I was in college, about half a millionpeople in America were behind bars.  Today, there are about 2.2 million.  Black men are aboutsix times likelier to be in prison right now than white men. 
Around the world, we’ve still got challenges to solve that threaten everybody in the 21stcentury -- old scourges like disease and conflict, but also new challenges, from terrorism andclimate change. 
So make no mistake, Class of 2016 -- you’ve got plenty of work to do.  But as complicatedand sometimes intractable as these challenges may seem, the truth is that your generation isbetter positioned than any before you to meet those challenges, to flip the script. 
Now, how you do that, how you meet these challenges, how you bring about change willultimately be up to you.  My generation, like all generations, is too confined by our ownexperience, too invested in our own biases, too stuck in our ways to provide much of the newthinking that will be required.  But us old-heads have learned a few things that might beuseful in your journey.  So with the rest of my time, I’d like to offer some suggestions for howyoung leaders like you can fulfill your destiny and shape our collective future -- bend it in thedirection of justice and equality and freedom.
First of all -- and this should not be a problem for this group -- be confident in your heritage.   Be confident in your blackness.  One of the great changes that’s occurred in our countrysince I was your age is the realization there's no one way to be black.  Take it from somebodywho’s seen both sides of debate about whether I'm black enough.    In the past couplemonths, I’ve had lunch with the Queen of England and hosted Kendrick Lamar in the OvalOffice.  There’s no straitjacket, there's no constraints, there's no litmus test for authenticity. 
Look at Howard.  One thing most folks don’t know about Howard is how diverse it is.  Whenyou arrived here, some of you were like, oh, they've got black people in Iowa?    But it’s true -
- this class comes from big cities and rural communities, and some of you crossed oceans tostudy here.  You shatter stereotypes.  Some of you come from a long line of Bison.  Some ofyou are the first in your family to graduate from college.    You all talk different, you all dressdifferent.  You’re Lakers fans, Celtics fans, maybe even some hockey fans.   
And because of those who've come before you, you have models to follow.  You can work for acompany, or start your own.  You can go into politics, or run an organization that holdspoliticians accountable.  You can write a book that wins the National Book Award, or you canwrite the new run of “Black Panther.”
  
Or, like one of your alumni, Ta-Nehisi Coates, you can go ahead and just do both.  You cancreate your own style, set your own standard of beauty, embrace your own sexuality.  Thinkabout an icon we just lost -- Prince.  He blew up categories.  People didn’t know what Princewas doing.    And folks loved him for it. 
You need to have the same confidence.  Or as my daughters tell me all the time, “You be you,Daddy.”    Sometimes Sasha puts a variation on it -- "You do you, Daddy."    And becauseyou’re a black person doing whatever it is that you're doing, that makes it a black thing.  Feelconfident.
Second, even as we each embrace our own beautiful, unique, and valid versions of ourblackness, remember the tie that does bind us as African Americans -- and that is ourparticular awareness of injustice and unfairness and struggle.  That means we cannotsleepwalk through life.  We cannot be ignorant of history.    We can’t meet the world with asense of entitlement.  We can’t walk by a homeless man without asking why a society aswealthy as ours allows that state of affairs to occur.   We can’t just lock up a low-level dealerwithout asking why this boy, barely out of childhood, felt he had no other options.  We havecousins and uncles and brothers and sisters who we remember were just as smart and just astalented as we were, but somehow got ground down by structures that are unfair and unjust. 
And that means we have to not only question the world as it is, and stand up for those AfricanAmericans who haven’t been so lucky -- because, yes, you've worked hard, but you've alsobeen lucky.  That's a pet peeve of mine:  People who have been successful and don’t realizethey've been lucky.  That God may have blessed them; it wasn’t nothing you did.  So don’thave an attitude.  But we must expand our moral imaginations to understand and empathizewith all people who are struggling, not just black folks who are struggling -- the refugee, theimmigrant, the rural poor, the transgender person, and yes, the middle-aged white guy whoyou may think has all the advantages, but over the last several decades has seen his worldupended by economic and cultural and technological change, and feels powerless to stop it. You got to get in his head, too.
Number three:  You have to go through life with more than just passion for change; you needa strategy.  I'll repeat that.  I want you to have passion, but you have to have a strategy.  Notjust awareness, but action.  Not just hashtags, but votes.
  
You see, change requires more than righteous anger.  It requires a program, and it requiresorganizing.  At the 1964 Democratic Convention, Fannie Lou Hamer -- all five-feet-four-inchestall -- gave a fiery speech on the national stage.  But then she went back home to Mississippiand organized cotton pickers.  And she didn't have the tools and technology where you canwhip up a movement in minutes.  She had to go door to door.  And I’m so proud of the newguard of black civil rights leaders who understand this.  It’s thanks in large part to theactivism of young people like many of you, from Black Twitter to Black Lives Matter, thatAmerica’s eyes have been opened -- white, black, Democrat, Republican -- to the realproblems, for example, in our criminal justice system.
But to bring about structural change, lasting change, awareness is not enough.  It requireschanges in law, changes in custom.  If you care about mass incarceration, let me ask you: How are you pressuring members of Congress to pass the criminal justice reform bill nowpending before them?    If you care about better policing, do you know who your districtattorney is?  Do you know who your state’s attorney general is?  Do you know the difference? Do you know who appoints the police chief and who writes the police training manual?  Findout who they are, what their responsibilities are.  Mobilize the community, present them witha plan, work with them to bring about change, hold them accountable if they do not deliver. Passion is vital, but you've got to have a strategy.
And your plan better include voting -- not just some of the time, but all the time.    It isabsolutely true that 50 years after the Voting Rights Act, there are still too many barriers inthis country to vote.  There are too many people trying to erect new barriers to voting.  This isthe only advanced democracy on Earth that goes out of its way to make it difficult for peopleto vote.  And there's a reason for that.  There's a legacy to that.   
But let me say this:  Even if we dismantled every barrier to voting, that alone would notchange the fact that America has some of the lowest voting rates in the free world.  In 2014,only 36 percent of Americans turned out to vote in the midterms -- the secondlowestparticipation rate on record.  Youth turnout -- that would be you -- was less than 20 percent. Less than 20 percent.  Four out of five did not vote.  In 2012, nearly two in three AfricanAmericans turned out.  And then, in 2014, only two in five turned out.  You don’t think thatmade a difference in terms of the Congress I've got to deal with?  And then people arewondering, well, how come Obama hasn’t gotten this done?  How come he didn’t get thatdone?  You don’t think that made a difference?  What would have happened if you had turnedout at 50, 60, 70 percent, all across this country?
  
People try to make this political thing really complicated.  Like, what kind of reforms do weneed?  And how do we need to do that?  You know what, just vote.  It's math.  If you havemore votes than the other guy, you get to do what you want.    It's not that complicated. 
And you don’t have excuses.   You don’t have to guess the number of jellybeans in a jar orbubbles on a bar of soap to register to vote.  You don’t have to risk your life to cast a ballot. Other people already did that for you.   Your grandparents, your great grandparents might behere today if they were working on it.  What's your excuse?  When we don’t vote, we giveaway our power, disenfranchise ourselves -- right when we need to use the power that wehave; right when we need your power to stop others from taking away the vote and rights ofthose more vulnerable than you are -- the elderly and the poor, the formerly incarceratedtrying to earn their second chance.
So you got to vote all the time, not just when it’s cool, not just when it's time to elect aPresident, not just when you’re inspired.  It's your duty.  When it’s time to elect a member ofCongress or a city councilman, or a school board member, or a sheriff.  That’s how we changeour politics -- by electing people at every level who are representative of and accountable tous.  It is not that complicated.  Don’t make it complicated.
And finally, change requires more than just speaking out -- it requires listening, as well.  Inparticular, it requires listening to those with whom you disagree, and being prepared tocompromise.  When I was a state senator, I helped pass Illinois’s first racial profiling law, andone of the first laws in the nation requiring the videotaping of confessions in capital cases. And we were successful because, early on, I engaged law enforcement.  I didn’t say to them,oh, you guys are so racist, you need to do something.  I understood, as many of you do, thatthe overwhelming majority of police officers are good, and honest, and courageous, and fair,and love the communities they serve. 
And we knew there were some bad apples, and that even the good cops with the best ofintentions -- including, by the way, African American police officers -- might have unconsciousbiases, as we all do.  So we engaged and we listened, and we kept working until we builtconsensus.  And because we took the time to listen, we crafted legislation that was good forthe police -- because it improved the trust and cooperation of the community -- and it wasgood for the communities, who were less likely to be treated unfairly.  And I can say thisunequivocally:  Without at least the acceptance of the police organizations in Illinois, I couldnever have gotten those bills passed.  Very simple.  They would have blocked them. 
  
The point is, you need allies in a democracy.  That's just the way it is.  It can be frustratingand it can be slow.  But history teaches us that the alternative to democracy is always worse. That's not just true in this country.  It’s not a black or white thing.  Go to any country wherethe give and take of democracy has been repealed by one-party rule, and I will show you acountry that does not work. 
And democracy requires compromise, even when you are 100 percent right.  This is hard toexplain sometimes.  You can be completely right, and you still are going to have to engagefolks who disagree with you.  If you think that the only way forward is to be asuncompromising as possible, you will feel good about yourself, you will enjoy a certain moralpurity, but you’re not going to get what you want.  And if you don’t get what you want longenough, you will eventually think the whole system is rigged.  And that will lead to morecynicism, and less participation, and a downward spiral of more injustice and more anger andmore despair.  And that's never been the source of our progress.  That's how we cheatourselves of progress.
We remember Dr. King’s soaring oratory, the power of his letter from a Birmingham jail, themarches he led.  But he also sat down with President Johnson in the Oval Office to try and geta Civil Rights Act and a Voting Rights Act passed.  And those two seminal bills were notperfect -- just like the Emancipation Proclamation was a war document as much as it wassome clarion call for freedom.  Those mileposts of our progress were not perfect.  They did notmake up for centuries of slavery or Jim Crow or eliminate racism or provide for 40 acres and amule.  But they made things better.  And you know what, I will take better every time.  Ialways tell my staff -- better is good, because you consolidate your gains and then you moveon to the next fight from a stronger position. 
Brittany Packnett, a member of the Black Lives Matter movement and Campaign Zero, one ofthe Ferguson protest organizers, she joined our Task Force on 21st Century Policing.  Some ofher fellow activists questioned whether she should participate.  She rolled up her sleeves andsat at the same table with big city police chiefs and prosecutors.  And because she did, sheended up shaping many of the recommendations of that task force.  And thoserecommendations are now being adopted across the country -- changes that many of theprotesters called for.  If young activists like Brittany had refused to participate out of somesense of ideological purity, then those great ideas would have just remained ideas.  But shedid participate.  And that’s how change happens.
  
America is big and it is boisterous and it is more diverse than ever.  The president told methat we've got a significant Nepalese contingent here at Howard.  I would not have guessedthat.  Right on.  But it just tells you how interconnected we're becoming.  And with so manyfolks from so many places, converging, we are not always going to agree with each other. 
Another Howard alum, Zora Neale Hurston, once said -- this is a good quote here:  “Nothingthat God ever made is the same thing to more than one person.”  Think about that.  That’swhy our democracy gives us a process designed for us to settle our disputes with argumentand ideas and votes instead of violence and simple majority rule.  
So don’t try to shut folks out, don’t try to shut them down, no matter how much you mightdisagree with them.  There's been a trend around the country of trying to get colleges todisinvite speakers with a different point of view, or disrupt a politician’s rally.  Don’t do that --no matter how ridiculous or offensive you might find the things that come out of theirmouths.  Because as my grandmother used to tell me, every time a fool speaks, they are justadvertising their own ignorance.  Let them talk.  Let them talk.  If you don’t, you just makethem a victim, and then they can avoid accountability. 
That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t challenge them.  Have the confidence to challenge them, theconfidence in the rightness of your position.  There will be times when you shouldn’tcompromise your core values, your integrity, and you will have the responsibility to speak upin the face of injustice.  But listen.  Engage.  If the other side has a point, learn from them.  Ifthey’re wrong, rebut them.  Teach them.  Beat them on the battlefield of ideas.  And youmight as well start practicing now, because one thing I can guarantee you -- you will have todeal with ignorance, hatred, racism, foolishness, trifling folks.    I promise you, you will haveto deal with all that at every stage of your life.  That may not seem fair, but life has neverbeen completely fair.  Nobody promised you a crystal stair.  And if you want to make life fair,then you've got to start with the world as it is.
So that’s my advice.  That’s how you change things.  Change isn’t something that happensevery four years or eight years; change is not placing your faith in any particular politician andthen just putting your feet up and saying, okay, go.  Change is the effort of committedcitizens who hitch their wagons to something bigger than themselves and fight for it everysingle day. 
That’s what Thurgood Marshall understood -- a man who once walked this year, graduatedfrom Howard Law; went home to Baltimore, started his own law practice.  He and his mentor,Charles Hamilton Houston, rolled up their sleeves and they set out to overturn segregation. 
  
They worked through the NAACP.  Filed dozens of lawsuits, fought dozens of cases.  And afternearly 20 years of effort -- 20 years -- Thurgood Marshall ultimately succeeded in bringing hisrighteous cause before the Supreme Court, and securing the ruling in Brown v. Board ofEducation that separate could never be equal.    Twenty years. 
Marshall, Houston -- they knew it would not be easy.  They knew it would not be quick.  Theyknew all sorts of obstacles would stand in their way.  They knew that even if they won, thatwould just be the beginning of a longer march to equality.  But they had discipline.  They hadpersistence.  They had faith -- and a sense of humor.  And they made life better for allAmericans.
And I know you graduates share those qualities.  I know it because I've learned about someof the young people graduating here today.  There's a young woman named Ciearra Jefferson,who’s graduating with you.  And I'm just going to use her as an example.  I hope you don’tmind, Ciearra.  Ciearra grew up in Detroit and was raised by a poor single mom who workedseven days a week in an auto plant.  And for a time, her family found themselves without aplace to call home.  They bounced around between friends and family who might take themin.  By her senior year, Ciearra was up at 5:00 am every day, juggling homework,extracurricular activities, volunteering, all while taking care of her little sister.  But she knewthat education was her ticket to a better life.  So she never gave up.  Pushed herself to excel. This daughter of a single mom who works on the assembly line turned down a full scholarshipto Harvard to come to Howard.   
And today, like many of you, Ciearra is the first in her family to graduate from college.  Andthen, she says, she’s going to go back to her hometown, just like Thurgood Marshall did, tomake sure all the working folks she grew up with have access to the health care they needand deserve.  As she puts it, she’s going to be a “change agent.”  She’s going to reach backand help folks like her succeed.
And people like Ciearra are why I remain optimistic about America.    Young people like youare why I never give in to despair. 
James Baldwin once wrote, “Not everything that is faced can be changed, but nothing can bechanged until it is faced.”
  
Graduates, each of us is only here because someone else faced down challenges for us.  Weare only who we are because someone else struggled and sacrificed for us.  That's not justThurgood Marshall’s story, or Ciearra’s story, or my story, or your story -- that is the story ofAmerica.  A story whispered by slaves in the cotton fields, the song of marchers in Selma, thedream of a King in the shadow of Lincoln.  The prayer of immigrants who set out for a newworld.  The roar of women demanding the vote.  The rallying cry of workers who builtAmerica.  And the GIs who bled overseas for our freedom. 
Now it’s your turn.  And the good news is, you’re ready.  And when your journey seems toohard, and when you run into a chorus of cynics who tell you that you’re being foolish to keepbelieving or that you can’t do something, or that you should just give up, or you should justsettle -- you might say to yourself a little phrase that I’ve found handy these last eight years: Yes, we can.
Congratulations, Class of 2016!   Good luck!  God bless you.  God bless the United States ofAmerica.  I'm proud of you.
