Good afternoon. Let me begin by thanking President Erdogan and the people of Antalya andTurkey for their outstanding work in hosting this G-20 Summit. Antalya is beautiful. Thehospitality of the Turkish people is legendary. To our Turkish friends -- çok teşekkürler [thankyou so much].  I've been practicing that.
At the G-20, our focus was on how to get the global economy growing faster and creatingmore jobs for our people. And I’m pleased that we agreed that growth has to be inclusive toaddress the rising inequality around the world.
Given growing cyber threats, we committed to a set of norms -- drafted by the United States -
- for how governments should conduct themselves in cyberspace, including a commitment notto engage in the cyber theft of intellectual property for commercial gain. And as we head intoglobal climate talks, all G-20 countries have submitted our targets, and we’ve pledged to worktogether for a successful outcome in Paris.
Of course, much of our attention has focused on the heinous attacks that took place in Paris.Across the world, in the United States, American flags are at half-staff in solidarity with ourFrench allies. We’re working closely with our French partners as they pursue theirinvestigations and track down suspects.
  
France is already a strong counterterrorism partner, and today we’re announcing a newagreement. We’re streamlining the process by which we share intelligence and operationalmilitary information with France. This will allow our personnel to pass threat information,including on ISIL, to our French partners even more quickly and more often -- because weneed to be doing everything we can to protect against more attacks and protect our citizens.
Tragically, Paris is not alone. We’ve seen outrageous attacks by ISIL in Beirut, last month inAnkara, routinely in Iraq. Here at the G-20, our nations have sent an unmistakable messagethat we are united against this threat. ISIL is the face of evil. Our goal, as I’ve said manytimes, is to degrade and ultimately destroy this barbaric terrorist organization.
As I outlined this fall at the United Nations, we have a comprehensive strategy using allelements of our power -- military, intelligence, economic, development, and the strength ofour communities. With have always understood that this would be a long-term campaign.There will be setbacks and there will be successes. The terrible events in Paris were a terribleand sickening setback. Even as we grieve with our French friends, however, we can’t losesight that there has been progress being made.
On the military front, our coalition is intensifying our airstrikes -- more than 8,000 to date.We’re taking out ISIL leaders, commanders, their killers. We’ve seen that when we have aneffective partner on the ground, ISIL can and is pushed back. So local forces in Iraq, backedby coalition airpower, recently liberated Sinjar. Iraqi forces are fighting to take back Ramadi.In Syria, ISIL has been pushed back from much of the border region with Turkey. We’vestepped up our support of opposition forces who are working to cut off supply lines to ISIL’sstrongholds in and around Raqqa. So, in short, both in Iraq and Syria, ISIL controls lessterritory than it did before.
I made the point to my fellow leaders that if we want this progress to be sustained, morenations need to step up with the resources that this fight demands.
Of course, the attacks in Paris remind us that it will not be enough to defeat ISIL in Syria andIraq alone. Here in Antalya, our nations, therefore, committed to strengthening bordercontrols, sharing more information, and stepping up our efforts to prevent the flow of foreignfighters in and out of Syria and Iraq. As the United States just showed in Libya, ISIL leaderswill have no safe haven anywhere. And we’ll continue to stand with leaders in Muslimcommunities, including faith leaders, who are the best voices to discredit ISIL’s warpedideology.
On the humanitarian front, our nations agreed that we have to do even more, individually andcollectively, to address the agony of the Syrian people. The United States is already thelargest donor of humanitarian aid to the Syrian people -- some $4.5 billion in aid so far. Aswinter approaches, we’re donating additional supplies, including clothing and generators,through the United Nations.
  
But the U.N. appeal for Syria still has less than half the funds needed. Today, I’m again callingon more nations to contribute the resources that this crisis demands.
In terms of refugees, it’s clear that countries like Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan -- which arealready bearing an extraordinary burden -- cannot be expected to do so alone. At the sametime, all of our countries have to ensure our security. And as President, my first priority is thesafety of the American people. And that’s why, even as we accept more refugees -- includingSyrians -- we do so only after subjecting them to rigorous screening and security checks.
We also have to remember that many of these refugees are the victims of terrorismthemselves -- that’s what they’re fleeing. Slamming the door in their faces would be abetrayal of our values. Our nations can welcome refugees who are desperately seeking safetyand ensure our own security. We can and must do both.
Finally, we’ve begun to see some modest progress on the diplomatic front, which is criticalbecause a political solution is the only way to end the war in Syria and unite the Syrian peopleand the world against ISIL. The Vienna talks mark the first time that all the key countrieshave come together -- as a result, I would add, of American leadership -- and reached acommon understanding. With this weekend’s talks, there’s a path forward -- negotiationsbetween the Syrian opposition and the Syrian regime under the auspices of the UnitedNations; a transition toward a more inclusive, representative government; a new constitution,followed by free elections; and, alongside this political process, a ceasefire in the civil war,even as we continue to fight against ISIL.
These are obviously ambitious goals. Hopes for diplomacy in Syria have been dashed before.There are any number of ways that this latest diplomatic push could falter. And there are stilldisagreements between the parties, including, most critically, over the fate of Bashar Assad,who we do not believe has a role in Syria’s future because of his brutal rule. His war againstthe Syrian people is the primary root cause of this crisis.
What is different this time, and what gives us some degree of hope, is that, as I said, for thefirst time, all the major countries on all sides of the Syrian conflict agree on a process that isneeded to end this war. And so while we are very clear-eyed about the very, very difficultroad still head, the United States, in partnership with our coalition, is going to remainrelentless on all fronts -- military, humanitarian and diplomatic. We have the right strategy,and we’re going to see it through.
So with that, I'm going to take some questions. And I will begin with Jerome Cartillier of AFP.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. One hundred and twenty-nine people were killed in Parison Friday night. ISIL claimed responsibility for the massacre, sending the message that theycould now target civilians all over the world. The equation has clearly changed. Isn't it time foryour strategy to change?
  
President Obama: Well, keep in mind what we have been doing. We have a military strategythat is putting enormous pressure on ISIL through airstrikes; that has put assistance andtraining on the ground with Iraqi forces; we're now working with Syrian forces as well tosqueeze ISIL, cut off their supply lines. We've been coordinating internationally to reduce theirfinancing capabilities, the oil that they’re trying to ship outside. We are taking strikes againsthigh-value targets -- including, most recently, against the individual who was on the videoexecuting civilians who had already been captured, as well as the head of ISIL in Libya. So it'snot just in Iraq and Syria.
And so, on the military front, we are continuing to accelerate what we do. As we findadditional partners on the ground that are effective, we work with them more closely. I’vealready authorized additional Special Forces on the ground who are going to be able toimprove that coordination.
On the counterterrorism front, keep in mind that since I came into office, we have beenworried about these kinds of attacks. The vigilance that the United States governmentmaintains and the cooperation that we’re consistently expanding with our European and otherpartners in going after every single terrorist network is robust and constant. And every fewweeks, I meet with my entire national security team and we go over every single threatstream that is presented, and where we have relevant information, we share it immediatelywith our counterparts around the world, including our European partners.
On aviation security, we have, over the last several years, been working so that at variousairports sites -- not just in the United States, but overseas -- we are strengthening ourmechanisms to screen and discover passengers who should not be boarding flights, andimproving the matters in which we are screening luggage that is going onboard.
And on the diplomatic front, we’ve been consistently working to try to get all the partiestogether to recognize that there is a moderate opposition inside of Syria that can form thebasis for a transition government, and to reach out not only to our friends but also to theRussians and the Iranians who are on the other side of this equation to explain to them thatultimately an organization like ISIL is the greatest danger to them, as well as to us.
So there will be an intensification of the strategy that we put forward, but the strategy that weare putting forward is the strategy that ultimately is going to work. But as I said from thestart, it’s going to take time.
And what’s been interesting is, in the aftermath of Paris, as I listen to those who suggestsomething else needs to be done, typically the things they suggest need to be done are thingswe are already doing. The one exception is that there have been a few who suggested that weshould put large numbers of U.S. troops on the ground.
  
And keep in mind that we have the finest military in the world and we have the finest militaryminds in the world, and I’ve been meeting with them intensively for years now, discussingthese various options, and it is not just my view but the view of my closest military andcivilian advisors that that would be a mistake -- not because our military could not march intoMosul or Raqqa or Ramadi and temporarily clear out ISIL, but because we would see arepetition of what we’ve seen before, which is, if you do not have local populations that arecommitted to inclusive governance and who are pushing back against ideological extremes,that they resurface -- unless we’re prepared to have a permanent occupation of thesecountries.
And let’s assume that we were to send 50,000 troops into Syria. What happens when there’s aterrorist attack generated from Yemen? Do we then send more troops into there? Or Libya,perhaps? Or if there’s a terrorist network that’s operating anywhere else -- in North Africa, orin Southeast Asia?
So a strategy has to be one that can be sustained. And the strategy that we’re pursuing,which focuses on going after targets, limiting wherever possible the capabilities of ISIL on theground -- systematically going after their leadership, their infrastructure, strengthening Shia -
- or strengthening Syrian and Iraqi forces and Kurdish forces that are prepared to fight them,cutting off their borders and squeezing the space in which they can operate until ultimatelywe’re able to defeat them -- that’s the strategy we’re going to have to pursue.
And we will continue to generate more partners for that strategy. And there are going to besome things that we try that don’t work; there will be some strategies we try that do work.And when we find strategies that work, we will double down on those.
Margaret Brennan, CBS.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. A more than year-long bombing campaign in Iraq and inSyria has failed to contain the ambition and the ability of ISIS to launch attacks in the West.Have you underestimated their abilities? And will you widen the rules of engagement for U.S.forces to take more aggressive action?
President Obama: No, we haven't underestimated our abilities. This is precisely why we’re inIraq as we speak, and why we’re operating in Syria as we speak. And it’s precisely why wehave mobilized 65 countries to go after ISIL, and why I hosted at the United Nations an entirediscussion of counterterrorism strategies and curbing the flow of foreign fighters, and whywe’ve been putting pressure on those countries that have not been as robust as they need toin tracking the flow of foreign fighters in and out of Syria and Iraq.
And so there has been an acute awareness on the part of my administration from the startthat it is possible for an organization like ISIL that has such a twisted ideology, and has shownsuch extraordinary brutality and complete disregard for innocent lives, that they would havethe capabilities to potentially strike in the West.
  
And because thousands of fighters have flowed from the West and are European citizens -- afew hundred from the United States, but far more from Europe -- that when those foreignfighters returned, it posed a significant danger. And we have consistently worked with ourEuropean partners, disrupting plots in some cases. Sadly, this one was not disrupted in time.
But understand that one of the challenges we have in this situation is, is that if you have ahandful of people who don’t mind dying, they can kill a lot of people. That’s one of thechallenges of terrorism. It’s not their sophistication or the particular weapon that theypossess, but it is the ideology that they carry with them and their willingness to die. And inthose circumstances, tracking each individual, making sure that we are disrupting andpreventing these attacks is a constant effort at vigilance, and requires extraordinarycoordination.
Now, part of the reason that it is important what we do in Iraq and Syria is that the narrativethat ISIL developed of creating this caliphate makes it more attractive to potential recruits. Sowhen I said that we are containing their spread in Iraq and Syria, in fact, they control lessterritory than they did last year. And the more we shrink that territory, the less they canpretend that they are somehow a functioning state, and the more it becomes apparent thatthey are simply a network of killers who are brutalizing local populations. That allows us toreduce the flow of foreign fighters, which then, over time, will lessen the numbers of terroristswho can potentially carry out terrible acts like they did in Paris.
And that’s what we did with al Qaeda. That doesn’t mean, by the way, that al Qaeda no longerpossess the capabilities of potentially striking the West. Al Qaeda in the Peninsula thatoperates primarily in Yemen we know has consistently tried to target the West. And we areconsistently working to disrupt those acts. But despite the fact that they have not gotten asmuch attention as ISIL, they still pose a danger, as well.
And so our goals here consistently have to be to be aggressive, and to leave no stoneunturned, but also recognize this is not conventional warfare. We play into the ISIL narrativewhen we act as if they’re a state, and we use routine military tactics that are designed to fighta state that is attacking another state. That’s not what’s going on here.
These are killers with fantasies of glory who are very savvy when it comes to social media,and are able to infiltrate the minds of not just Iraqis or Syrians, but disaffected individualsaround the world. And when they activate those individuals, those individuals can do a lot ofdamage. And so we have to take the approach of being rigorous on our counterterrorismefforts, and consistently improve and figure out how we can get more information, how wecan infiltrate these networks, how we can reduce their operational space, even as we also tryto shrink the amount of territory they control to defeat their narrative.
  
Ultimately, to reclaim territory from them is going to require, however, an ending of theSyrian civil war, which is why the diplomatic efforts are so important. And it’s going to requirean effective Iraqi effort that bridges Shia and Sunni differences, which is why our diplomaticefforts inside of Iraq are so important, as well.
Jim Avila.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. In the days and weeks before the Paris attacks, did youreceive warning in your daily intelligence briefing that an attack was imminent? If not, doesthat not call into question the current assessment that there is no immediate, specific,credible threat to the United States today?
And secondly, if I could ask you to address your critics who say that your reluctance to enteranother Middle East war, and your preference of diplomacy over using the military makes theUnited States weaker and emboldens our enemies.
President Obama: Jim, every day we have threat streams coming through the intelligencetransit. And as I said, every several weeks we sit down with all my national security,intelligence, and military teams to discuss various threat streams that may be generated. Andthe concerns about potential ISIL attacks in the West have been there for over a year now,and they come through periodically. There were no specific mentions of this particular attackthat would give us a sense of something that we need -- that we could provide Frenchauthorities, for example, or act on ourselves.
But typically the way the intelligence works is there will be a threat stream that is from onesource, how reliable is that source; perhaps some signal intelligence gets picked up, it’sevaluated. Some of it is extraordinarily vague and unspecific, and there’s no clear timetable.Some of it may be more specific, and then folks chase down that threat to see what happens.
I am not aware of anything that was specific in the sense -- that would have given apremonition about a particular action in Paris that would allow for law enforcement or militaryactions to disrupt it.
With respect to the broader issue of my critics, to some degree I answered the questionearlier. I think that when you listen to what they actually have to say, what they’re proposing,most of the time, when pressed, they describe things that we’re already doing. Maybe they’renot aware that we’re already doing them. Some of them seem to think that if I were just morebellicose in expressing what we’re doing, that that would make a difference -- because thatseems to be the only thing that they’re doing, is talking as if they’re tough. But I haven't seenparticular strategies that they would suggest that would make a real difference.
  
Now, there are a few exceptions. And as I said, the primary exception is those who woulddeploy U.S. troops on a large scale to retake territory either in Iraq or now in Syria. And atleast they have the honesty to go ahead and say that’s what they would do. I just addressedwhy I think they’re wrong. There have been some who are well-meaning, and I don’t doubttheir sincerity when it comes to the issue of the dire humanitarian situation in Syria, who, forexample, call for a no-fly zone or a safe zone of some sort.
And this is an example of the kind of issue where I will sit down with our top military andintelligence advisors, and we will painstakingly go through what does something like that looklike. And typically, after we’ve gone through a lot of planning and a lot of discussion, andreally working it through, it is determined that it would be counterproductive to take thosesteps -- in part because ISIL does not have planes, so the attacks are on the ground. A truesafe zone requires us to set up ground operations. And the bulk of the deaths that haveoccurred in Syria, for example, have come about not because of regime bombing, but becauseof on-the-ground casualties. Who would come in, who could come out of that safe zone; howwould it work; would it become a magnet for further terrorist attacks; and how manypersonnel would be required, and how would it end -- there’s a whole set of questions thathave to be answered there.
I guess my point is this, Jim: My only interest is to end suffering and to keep the Americanpeople safe. And if there’s a good idea out there, then we’re going to do it. I don’t think I’veshown hesitation to act -- whether it’s with respect to bin Laden or with respect to sendingadditional troops in Afghanistan, or keeping them there -- if it is determined that it’s actuallygoing to work.
But what we do not do, what I do not do is to take actions either because it is going to workpolitically or it is going to somehow, in the abstract, make America look tough, or make melook tough. And maybe part of the reason is because every few months I go to Walter Reed,and I see a 25-year-old kid who’s paralyzed or has lost his limbs, and some of those arepeople I’ve ordered into battle. And so I can’t afford to play some of the political games thatothers may.
We'll do what’s required to keep the American people safe. And I think it's entirely appropriatein a democracy to have a serious debate about these issues. If folks want to pop off and haveopinions about what they think they would do, present a specific plan. If they think thatsomehow their advisors are better than the Chairman of my Joint Chiefs of Staff and the folkswho are actually on the ground, I want to meet them. And we can have that debate. But whatI'm not interested in doing is posing or pursuing some notion of American leadership orAmerica winning, or whatever other slogans they come up with that has no relationship towhat is actually going to work to protect the American people, and to protect people in theregion who are getting killed, and to protect our allies and people like France. I'm too busy forthat.
  
Jim Acosta.
Question: Thank you very much, Mr. President. I wanted to go back to something that yousaid to Margaret earlier when you said that you have not underestimated ISIS’s abilities. Thisis an organization that you once described as a JV team that evolved into a force that has nowoccupied territory in Iraq and Syria and is now able to use that safe haven to launch attacks inother parts of the world. How is that not underestimating their capabilities? And how is thatcontained, quite frankly? And I think a lot of Americans have this frustration that they see thatthe United States has the greatest military in the world, it has the backing of nearly everyother country in the world when it comes to taking on ISIS. I guess the question is -- and ifyou’ll forgive the language -- is why can't we take out these bastards?
President Obama: Well, Jim, I just spent the last three questions answering that veryquestion, so I don't know what more you want me to add. I think I've described veryspecifically what our strategy is, and I've described very specifically why we do not pursuesome of the other strategies that have been suggested.
This is not, as I said, a traditional military opponent. We can retake territory. And as long aswe leave our troops there, we can hold it, but that does not solve the underlying problem ofeliminating the dynamics that are producing these kinds of violent extremist groups.
And so we are going to continue to pursue the strategy that has the best chance of working,even though it does not offer the satisfaction, I guess, of a neat headline or an immediateresolution. And part of the reason, as I said, Jim, is because there are costs to the other side.I just want to remind people, this is not an abstraction. When we send troops in, those troopsget injured, they get killed; they’re away from their families; our country spends hundreds ofbillions of dollars. And so given the fact that there are enormous sacrifices involved in anymilitary action, it's best that we don't shoot first and aim later. It's important for us to get thestrategy right. And the strategy that we are pursuing is the right one.
Ron Allen.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. I think a lot of people around the world and in Americaare concerned because given the strategy that you’re pursuing -- and it’s been more than ayear now -- ISIS’s capabilities seem to be expanding. Were you aware that they had thecapability of pulling off the kind of attack that they did in Paris? Are you concerned? And doyou think they have that same capability to strike in the United States?
And do you think that given all you’ve learned about ISIS over the past year or so, and givenall the criticism about your underestimating them, do you think you really understand thisenemy well enough to defeat them and to protect the homeland?
  
President Obama: All right, so this is another variation on the same question. And I guess --let me try it one last time. We have been fully aware of the potential capabilities of themcarrying out a terrorist attack. That’s precisely why we have been mounting a very aggressivestrategy to go after them. As I said before, when you’re talking about the ability of a handfulof people with not wildly sophisticated military equipment, weapons, who are willing to die,they can kill a lot of people. And preventing them from doing so is challenging for everycountry. And if there was a swift and quick solution to this, I assure you that not just theUnited States, but France and Turkey, and others who have been subject to these terroristattacks would have implemented those strategies.
There are certain advantages that the United States has in preventing these kinds of attacks.Obviously, after 9/11, we hardened the homeland, set up a whole series of additional steps toprotect aviation, to apply lessons learned. We’ve seen much better cooperation between theFBI, state governments, local governments. There is some advantages to geography withrespect to the United States.
But, having said that, we’ve seen the possibility of terrorist attacks on our soil. There was theBoston Marathon bombers. Obviously, it did not result in the scale of death that we saw inParis, but that was a serious attempt at killing a lot of people by two brothers and a crockpot.And it gives you some sense of, I think, the kinds of challenges that are going to be involvedin this going forward.
So again, ISIL has serious capabilities. Its capabilities are not unique. They are capabilitiesthat other terrorist organizations that we track and are paying attention to possess, as well.We are going after all of them.
What is unique about ISIL is the degree to which it has been able to control territory that thenallows them to attract additional recruits, and the greater effectiveness that they have onsocial media and their ability to use that to not only attract recruits to fight in Syria, but alsopotentially to carry out attacks in the homeland and in Europe and in other parts of the world.
And so our ability to shrink the space in which they can operate, combined with a resolution tothe Syria situation -- which will reduce the freedom with which they feel that they canoperate, and getting local forces who are able to hold and keep them out over the long term,that ultimately is going to be what’s going to make a difference. And it’s going to take sometime, but it’s not something that at any stage in this process have we not been aware needsto be done.
Question: [Off-mic] -- Mr. President?
President Obama: Okay, go ahead.
Question: Should I wait for the microphone?
  
President Obama: No, I can hear you.
Question: Okay, thank you so much. [Inaudible.] I want to ask a question [inaudible]. Theseterrorist attacks we’ve seen allegedly have been attacks under the name of Islam. But thisreally takes -- or upsets the peaceful people like countries like Turkey. So how can we give offthat [inaudible] this is not really representative of Muslims?
President Obama: Well, this is something that we spoke a lot about at the G-20. Theoverwhelming majority of victims of terrorism over the last several years, and certainly theoverwhelming majority of victims of ISIL, are themselves Muslims. ISIL does not representIslam. It is not representative in any way of the attitudes of the overwhelming majority ofMuslims. This is something that’s been emphasized by Muslim leaders -- whether it’s PresidentErdogan or the President of Indonesia or the President of Malaysia -- countries that aremajority Muslim, but have shown themselves to be tolerant and to work to be inclusive intheir political process.
And so to the degree that anyone would equate the terrible actions that took place in Pariswith the views of Islam, those kinds of stereotypes are counterproductive. They’re wrong.They will lead, I think, to greater recruitment into terrorist organizations over time if thisbecomes somehow defined as a Muslim problem as opposed to a terrorist problem.
Now, what is also true is, is that the most vicious terrorist organizations at the moment areones that claim to be speaking on behalf of true Muslims. And I do think that Muslims aroundthe world -- religious leaders, political leaders, ordinary people -- have to ask very seriousquestions about how did these extremist ideologies take root, even if it’s only affecting a verysmall fraction of the population. It is real and it is dangerous. And it has built up over time,and with social media it has now accelerated.
And so I think, on the one hand, non-Muslims cannot stereotype, but I also think the Muslimcommunity has to think about how we make sure that children are not being infected with thistwisted notion that somehow they can kill innocent people and that that is justified by religion.And to some degree, that is something that has to come from within the Muslim communityitself. And I think there have been times where there has not been enough pushback againstextremism. There’s been pushback -- there are some who say, well, we don’t believe inviolence, but are not as willing to challenge some of the extremist thoughts or rationales forwhy Muslims feel oppressed. And I think those ideas have to be challenged.
Let me make one last point about this, and then unfortunately I have to take a flight toManila. I’m looking forward to seeing Manila, but I hope I can come back to Turkey when I’mnot so busy.
  
One of the places that you’re seeing this debate play itself out is on the refugee issue both inEurope, and I gather it started popping up while I was gone back in the United States. Thepeople who are fleeing Syria are the most harmed by terrorism, they are the most vulnerableas a consequence of civil war and strife. They are parents, they are children, they areorphans. And it is very important -- and I was glad to see that this was affirmed again andagain by the G-20 -- that we do not close our hearts to these victims of such violence andsomehow start equating the issue of refugees with the issue of terrorism.
In Europe, I think people like Chancellor Merkel have taken a very courageous stance insaying it is our moral obligation, as fellow human beings, to help people who are in suchvulnerable situations. And I know that it is putting enormous strains on the resources of thepeople of Europe. Nobody has been carrying a bigger burden than the people here in Turkey,with 2.5 million refugees, and the people of Jordan and Lebanon, who are also admittingrefugees. The fact that they’ve kept their borders open to these refugees is a signal of theirbelief in a common humanity.
And so we have to, each of us, do our part. And the United States has to step up and do itspart. And when I hear folks say that, well, maybe we should just admit the Christians but notthe Muslims; when I hear political leaders suggesting that there would be a religious test forwhich a person who’s fleeing from a war-torn country is admitted, when some of those folksthemselves come from families who benefitted from protection when they were fleeingpolitical persecution -- that’s shameful. That’s not American. That’s not who we are. We don’thave religious tests to our compassion.
When Pope Francis came to visit the United States, and gave a speech before Congress, hedidn’t just speak about Christians who were being persecuted. He didn’t call on Catholicparishes just to admit to those who were of the same religious faith. He said, protect peoplewho are vulnerable.
And so I think it is very important for us right now -- particularly those who are in leadership,particularly those who have a platform and can be heard -- not to fall into that trap, not tofeed that dark impulse inside of us.
I had a lot of disagreements with George W. Bush on policy, but I was very proud after 9/11when he was adamant and clear about the fact that this is not a war on Islam. And the notionthat some of those who have taken on leadership in his party would ignore all of that, that’snot who we are. On this, they should follow his example. It was the right one. It was the rightimpulse. It’s our better impulse. And whether you are European or American, the values thatwe are defending -- the values that we’re fighting against ISIL for are precisely that we don’tdiscriminate against people because of their faith. We don’t kill people because they’redifferent than us. That’s what separates us from them. And we don’t feed that kind of notionthat somehow Christians and Muslims are at war.
  
And if we want to be successful at defeating ISIL, that’s a good place to start -- by notpromoting that kind of ideology, that kind of attitude. In the same way that the Muslimcommunity has an obligation not to in any way excuse anti-Western or anti-Christiansentiment, we have the same obligation as Christians. And we are -- it is good to rememberthat the United States does not have a religious test, and we are a nation of many peoples ofdifferent faiths, which means that we show compassion to everybody. Those are the universalvalues we stand for. And that’s what my administration intends to stand for.
Thank you very much, everybody.
