Anderson Cooper: Good evening from George Mason University here in Fairfax, Virginia.  Weare here tonight to talk about one of the most divisive issues in America today -- guns.  Theirprotection is enshrined in the Constitution, in the Second Amendment, and gun ownership isan integral part of American history and culture.
There are some 30,000 gun deaths in America each year.  Two-thirds of them are suicides;one-third of them are homicides.  So the question we want to confront tonight is how you finda balance between protecting the rights of American citizens who want to own guns, butpreventing guns from getting into the hands of people who shouldn’t have them.
We brought together people here tonight who represent really all sides of the issue -- gunowners, gun sellers, people who have survived shootings or lost loved ones.  Some herebelieve that having more guns makes us all safer, and believe the right to bear arms definesus, preserves us from tyranny and cannot be compromised in any way.  Others here tonightbelieve just as passionately that more needs to be done to limit the sale of firearms.  And werespect all of their views, and we want to hear from as many as we can tonight in the hourahead.
  
One voice you will not hear from tonight is the National Rifle Association.  They’re the nation’slargest, most influential and powerful gun rights group.  We invited them to be here -- I thinktheir office is just a couple miles away.  They declined to take part.  Some of their membersare here tonight, though.  We're very thankful for that.  And so are representatives from theNational Firearms Retailers Association.
This town hall is not something the White House dreamed up or that the White Houseorganized.  CNN approached the White House shortly after the San Bernardino terror attackwith this idea.  And we're pleased that they agreed to participate and pleased to welcometonight the President of the United States, Barack Obama.
President Obama:  Thank you, everybody.  Thank you.
Anderson Cooper:   Hello, Mr. President.  Welcome.
President Obama:  Great to see you.
Anderson Cooper:   Good to see you.  Let me start.  Have you ever owned a gun?
President Obama:  I have never owned a gun.  Now, up at Camp David, we've got someskeet shooting, so on a fairly regular basis, we get a 12-gauge and -- I'm not making anyclaims about my marksmanship.
Anderson Cooper:   Before you were President, did you ever feel a desire to get a gun, feelthe need to get a gun?
President Obama:  I grew up mostly in Hawaii, and other than hunting for wild pig -- whichthey do once in a while -- there’s not the popularity of hunting and sportsmanship with gunsas much as there are in other parts of the country.
Anderson Cooper:   I mean, I ask the question because there’s a lot of people out there whodon't trust you, obviously, on the issue of guns.  You keep saying you don't want to take awayeverybody’s guns.  But there’s a lot of people out there tonight watching who don't believeyou.  There are a lot of people in this room who, frankly, don't believe you.  And it's not justthat you don't really have personal experience having owned a gun, but that things you’vesaid:  Support for Australia’s tough anti-gun policies.  They banned semi-automatic assaultrifles.  They banned even shotguns in Australia.  You’ve praised their policies over and over.
Back in 2008, you said -- you talked about “bitter Americans clinging to their guns.”  Evennow, these executive actions have caused a lot of concern among a lot of people.  What canyou say to somebody tonight to convince them that you don't want to take away everybody’sguns and you're not coming for their guns?
  
President Obama:  Well, first of all, Anderson, I think it's useful to keep in mind I've beennow President for over seven years and gun sales don't seem to have suffered during thattime.
Anderson Cooper:   If anything, actually --
President Obama:  They’ve gone up.  I've been very good for gun manufacturers.  Moreimportantly -- I'll tell you a story that I think indicates how I see the issue. Back in 2007-
2008, when I was campaigning, I’d leave Chicago, a city which is wonderful, I couldn't beprouder of my city, but where every week there’s a story about a young person getting shot. Some are gang members and it's turf battles.  Sometimes it's innocent victims.
Anderson Cooper:   Fifty-five people have been shot in Chicago in the last seven days.
President Obama:  Sometimes it's happened just a few blocks from my house, and I live in areasonably good neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago. So that's one image -- talking tofamilies who’ve gone through the pain of losing somebody because of violence in Chicago --gun violence.
Michelle and I are then campaigning out in Iowa, and we're going to farms and we're going tocounties.  And at one point, Michelle turned to me and she said, you know, if I was living in afarmhouse, where the sheriff’s department is pretty far away, and somebody can just turn offthe highway and come up to the farm, I'd want to have a shotgun or a rifle to make sure thatI was protected and my family was protected.  And she was absolutely right.
And so part of the reason I think that this ends up being such a difficult issue is becausepeople occupy different realities.  There are a whole bunch of law-abiding citizens who havegrown up hunting with their dad, or going to the shooting range, and are responsible gunowners.  And then there’s the reality that there are neighborhoods around the country whereit is easier for a 12 or 13-year-old to purchase a gun -- and cheaper -- than it is for them toget a book.
Anderson Cooper:   But what you're proposing, what you proposed this week, the executiveactions, the other things, are they really going to be effective?  And I ask this because thevast majority of felons out there -- I mean, we can all agree criminals should not get guns; wewant to keep guns out of the hands of criminals.  The vast majority of criminals get their gunsfrom -- either illegally or from family or friends.  So background checks is not somethingthat's going to affect them, is it?
President Obama:  Well, but that's not exactly accurate.  Look, first of all, it's important foreverybody to understand what I've proposed and what I haven't proposed. What I've saidconsistently throughout my presidency is I respect the Second Amendment; I respect theright to bear arms; I respect people who want a gun for self-protection, for hunting, for
  
sportsmanship.  But all of us can agree that it makes sense to do everything we can to keepguns out of the hands of people who would try to do others harm, or to do themselves harm.
Because every year we're losing 30,000 people to gun violence.  Two-thirds of those areactually suicides.  Hundreds of kids under the age of 18 are being shot or shootingthemselves, often by accident -- many of them under the age of five.  And so if we cancombine gun safety with sensible background checks and some other steps, we're not going toeliminate gun violence, but we will lessen it.  And if we take that number from 30,000 downto, let’s say, 28,000, that's 2,000 families who don't have to go through what the families atNewtown or San Bernardino or Charleston went through.
And so what we've proposed is that if you have a background check system that has a bunchof big loopholes, which is why a lot of criminals and people who shouldn’t have guns are ableto get guns --
Question:  But they’re not buying them at gun shows -- only 1 percent of criminals arebuying them at gun shows.
President Obama:  No, but this is what happens.  Let’s go back to the city of Chicago thathas strong gun control laws.  And oftentimes the NRA will point to that as an example andsay, see, these things don’t work.  Well, the problem is, is that about 30, 40 percent of thoseguns are coming from Indiana, across the border, where there are much laxer laws.  And sofolks will go to a gun show and purchase a whole bunch of firearms, put them in a van, driveup into Mike Pfleger’s neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago, where his parish is, openup the trunk, and those things are for sale.
Now, technically, you could say those folks bought them illegally, but it was facilitated by thefact that what used to be a small exception that said collectors and hobbyists don’t need to gothrough a background check has become this massive industry where people who are doingbusiness are, in fact, saying that they’re not in the business of selling guns, but are.
And all we’re saying here is, is that we want to put everybody on notice that the definition ofdoing business -- which means you have to register, and it means you have to run abackground check -- is if you are making a profit and repeatedly selling guns, then you shouldhave to follow the same rules as every other gun dealer.  And what that means --
Anderson Cooper:   There are a lot of people who believe that’s not specific enough becausethere’s a lot of fathers and sons who sell guns every now and then and at gun shows.  Arethey going to have to now start doing background checks?  Are they going to start to have toregister?
  
President Obama:  Look, what the Justice Department has done is provided a whole rangeof very specific examples.  And what we ultimately need I believe is for Congress to set up asystem that is efficient, that doesn’t inconvenience the lawful gun seller or purchaser, but thatmakes sure that we’re doing the best background check possible.
And the fact, Anderson, that the system may not catch every single person, or there may be acircumstance where somebody doesn’t think that they have to register and do, and that maycause some red tape and bureaucracy for them, which -- or inconvenience -- has to beweighed against the fact that we may be able to save a whole bunch of families from the griefthat some of the people in this audience have had to go through.
And keep in mind, for the gun owners who are in attendance here, my suspicion is, is that youall had to go through a background check and it didn’t prevent you from getting a weapon.And the notion that you should have to do that but there are a whole bunch of folks who areless responsible than you who don’t have to do it doesn’t make much sense.
So why we should resist this -- keep in mind that, historically, the NRA was in favor ofbackground checks.  Historically, many in the Republican Party were in favor of backgroundchecks.  And what’s changed is not that my proposals are particularly radical.  What’s changedis we’ve suddenly created an atmosphere in which I put out a proposal like background checksor, after Sandy Hook, was calling on Congress, along with people like Gabby Giffords, whoherself was a victim of gun violence -- we put out a proposal that is common sense, modest,does not claim to solve every problem, is respectful of the Second Amendment, and the way itis described is that we’re trying to take away everybody’s guns.
And part of the reason I welcomed this opportunity by CNN to have a good discussion anddebate about it is because our position is consistently mischaracterized.  And, by the way,there’s a reason why the NRA is not here.  They’re just down the street, and since this is themain reason they exist, you’d think that they’d be prepared to have a debate with thePresident.
Anderson Cooper:   They haven't been to the White House for years.
President Obama:  Oh, no, no -- we’ve invited them.  We've invited them.
Anderson Cooper:   So, right now, tonight, you’re saying you would be --
President Obama:  We have invited them repeatedly.  But if you listen to the rhetoric, it isso over the top and so over-heated, and, most importantly, is not acknowledging the fact thatthere’s no other consumer item that we purchase --
Question:  So is that an open invitation that --
  
President Obama:  Hold on a second.  Let me finish this point, Cooper.  There’s nothing elsein our lives that we purchase where we don’t try to make it a little safer if we can.  Trafficfatalities have gone down drastically during my lifetime.  And part of it is technology, and partof it is the National Highway Safety Administration does research and they figure out, youknow what, seatbelts really work.  And then we passed some laws to make sure seatbelts arefastened.  Airbags make a lot of sense; let’s try those out.  Toys -- we say, you know what,we find out that kids are swallowing toys all the time, let’s make sure that the toys aren’t sosmall that they swallow them if they’re for toddlers or infants.  Medicine -- kids can’t openaspirin caps.
Now, the notion that we would not apply the same basic principles to gun ownership as we doto everything else that we own just to try to make them safer, or the notion that anything wedo to try to make them safer is somehow a plot to take away guns, that contradicts what wedo to try to create a better life for Americans in every other area of our lives.
Anderson Cooper:   And just so I’m clear, tonight you’re saying you would welcome to meetwith the NRA?
President Obama:  Anderson, I’ve said this repeatedly -- I’m happy to meet with them.  I’mhappy to talk to them.  But the conversation has to be based on facts and truth and whatwe’re actually proposing, not some imaginary fiction in which Obama is trying to take awayyour guns. The reason, by the way, that gun sales spike not just before I propose something -
- every time there is a mass shooting, gun sales spike.  And part of the reason is, is that theNRA has convinced many of its members that somebody is going come grab your guns --which is, by the way, really profitable for the gun manufacturers.  It’s a great advertisingmechanism, but it’s not necessary.  There’s enough of a market out there for people who wantprotection, who are sportsmen, who wants to go hunting with their kids.  And we can make itsafer.
Anderson Cooper:   I want to open this up to people in our audience.
President Obama:  Absolutely.
Anderson Cooper:   People have traveled far.  I want you to meet Taya Kyle.  She’s thewidow of Chris Kyle, former Navy SEAL, author of “American Sniper.”  Taya wrote a book,“American Life: A Memoir of Love, War, Faith, and Renewal.” Taya, we’re happy you’re here. What do you want to ask the President?
Question:  I appreciate you taking the time to come here.  And I think that your message ofhope is something I agree with, and I think it’s great.  And I think that by creating new lawsyou do give people hope.  The thing is that the laws that we create don’t stop these horrificthings from happening, right?  And that’s a very tough pill to swallow.
President Obama:  Right.
  
Question:  We want to think that we can make a law and people will follow it.  But by thevery nature of their crime, they’re not following it.  By the very nature of looking at the peoplewho hurt our loved ones here, I don’t know that any of them would have been stopped by thebackground check.  And yet -- I crave that desire for hope, too.  And so I think, part of it, wehave to recognize that we cannot outlaw murder, because the people who are murdering are -
- they’re breaking the law, but they also don’t have a moral code that we have.  And so theycould do the same amount of damage with a pipe bomb.  The problem is that they want tomurder.
And I’m wondering why it wouldn’t be a better use of our time to give people hope in adifferent way, to say, you know what, we -- well, first of all, actually, let me back up to that.Because with the laws, I know that at least the last I heard, the federal prosecution of guncrimes was like 40 percent.  And what I mean by that is that there are people lying on theseforms already, and we’re not prosecuting them.  So there’s an issue there, right?  But instead,if we can give people hope and say that also during this time, while you’ve been President, weare at the lowest murder rate in our country -- all-time low of murders.  We’re at an all-timehigh of gun ownership, right?  I’m not necessarily saying that the two are correlated, but whatI’m saying is that we’re at an all-time low for a murder rate.  That’s a big deal.
And yet, I think most of us in this country feel like it could happen at any moment.  It couldhappen to any of us at any time, at a moment’s notice.  When you talk about the NRA, andafter a mass shooting that gun sales go up, I would argue that it’s not necessarily that I thinksomebody is going to come take my gun from me, but I want the hope, and the hope that Ihave the right to protect myself, that I don’t end up to be one of these families; that I havethe freedom to carry whatever weapon I feel I need, just like your wife said on that farm.  Thesheriff is not going to get to my house, either.  And I understand that background checksaren’t necessarily going to stop me from getting a gun, but I also know that they wouldn’thave stopped any of the people here in this room from killing.  And so it seems like almost afalse sense of hope. So why not celebrate where we are?  I guess that’s my real question -- iscelebrate that we’re good people, and 99.9 percent of us are never going to kill anyone.
President Obama:  Well, let me make a couple of points.  First of all, thanks to yourhusband for his service, and thank you for your service, because of extraordinary heroism thathe and your family have shown in protecting all of us.  And I’m very grateful for that.
Number two, what you said about murder rates and violent crime generally is something thatwe don’t celebrate enough.  The fact of the matter is, is that violent crime has been steadilydeclining across America for a pretty long time.  And you wouldn’t always know it by watchingtelevision, but overall, most cities are much safer than they were 10 years ago or 20 yearsago.
  
Now, I’d challenge the notion that the reason for that is because there’s more gun ownership,because if you look at where are the areas with the highest gun ownership, those are theplaces, in some cases, where the crime rate hasn’t dropped down that much.  And the placeswhere there’s pretty stiff restrictions on gun ownership, in some of those places the crime hasdropped really quickly.  So I’m not sure that there’s a one-to-one correlation there.
But I think the most important point I want to make is that you will be able to purchase afirearm.  Some criminals will get their hands on firearms even if there’s a background check. Somebody may lie on a form.  Somebody will intend to commit a crime but they don’t have arecord that shows up on the background check system.
But in the same way that we don’t eliminate all traffic accidents, but over the course of 20years, traffic accidents get lower -- there’s still tragedies, there’s still drunk drivers, there’sstill people who don’t wear their seatbelts -- but over time, that violence was reduced, and sofamilies are spared.  That’s the same thing that we can do with gun ownership.
There is a way for us to set up a system where you, a responsible gun owner, who I’massuming, given your husband and your family, is a much better marksman than I am, canhave a firearm to protect yourself, but where it is much harder for somebody to fill up a carwith guns and sell them to 13-year-old kids on the streets.  And that is I think what we’retrying to do.
What we’re also trying to do is make the database more effective -- so that’s part of theproposal -- which, by the way, will convenience you when you go to the store, because if wecan set up a 24/7 background check system, then that means that it’s less likely that thingsslip through the cracks or it’s more difficult for you to get your background check completed.
And we’re also trying to close a loophole that has been developing over the last decade wherenow people are using cut-out trusts and shell corporations to purchase the most dangerousweapons -- sawed-off shotguns, automatic weapons, silencers -- and don’t have to go throughbackground checks at all.  And we don’t know whether -- are these sales going to drugtraffickers? We don’t know who’s purchasing them right now.  And so what we’re saying is,you know what, that is something that we’ve got to do something about.
The same thing is true with Internet sales, where one study has shown that one out of 30persons who are purchasing weapons over the Internet turn out to have a felony record.  Andthat’s not something you want to see.
Anderson Cooper:   I think one question a lot of people have about you is do you believe thefundamental notion that a good guy with a gun or a good woman with a gun is an importantbulwark against a bad person with a gun?  And before you answer, I want you to meetKimberly Corban.  Kimberly was a college student in Colorado in 2006 -- Kimberly is right overthere.
  
She was raped by a man who broke into her apartment.  She testified for three hours in thetrial against him.  Her attacker was sentenced to 24-years-to-life in prison.  And I know thatattack, Kimberly, changed your view of handguns.  What’s your question for the President?
Question:  Absolutely.  As a survivor of rape and now a mother to two small children, itseems like being able to purchase a firearm of my choosing, and being able to carry thatwherever me and my family are, it seems like my basic responsibility as a parent at thispoint.  I have been unspeakably victimized once already, and I refuse to let that happen againto myself or my kids.  So why can’t your Administration see that these restrictions that you’reputting to make it harder for me to own a gun, or harder for me to take that where I need tobe is actually just making my kids and I less safe?
President Obama:  Well, Kimberly, first of all, obviously, your story is horrific.  The strengthyou’ve shown in telling your story and being here tonight is remarkable.  And so I’m reallyproud of you for that.
I just want to repeat that there’s nothing that we’ve proposed that would make it harder foryou to purchase a firearm. And now, you may be referring to issues like concealed carry, butthose tend to be state-by-state decisions, and we’re not making any proposals with respect towhat states are doing.  They can make their own decisions there.  So there really is no --nothing that we’re proposing that prevents you or makes it harder for you to purchase afirearm if you need one.
There are always questions as to whether or not having a firearm in the home protects youfrom that kind of violence.  And I’m not sure we can resolve that.  People argue it both sides. What is true is, is that you have to be pretty well trained in order to fire a weapon againstsomebody who is assaulting you and catches you by surprise.  And what is also true is there’salways the possibility that that firearm in a home leads to a tragic accident.  We can debatethat, round or flat.
But for now, what I just want to focus on is that you certainly would like to make it a littleharder for that assailant to have also had a gun.  You certainly would want to make sure thatif he gets released, that he now can’t do what he did to you to somebody else.  And it’s goingto be easier for us to prevent him from getting a gun if there’s a strong background system inplace -- background check system in place.
And so if you look at the statistics, there’s no doubt that there are times where somebody whohas a weapon has been able to protect themselves and scare off an intruder or an assailant. But what is more often the case is that they may not have been able to protect themselvesbut they end up the victim of the weapon that they purchased themselves.  And that’ssomething that can be debated.  In the meantime, all I’m focused on is making sure that aterrible crime like yours that was committed is not made easier because somebody can go onthe Internet and just buy whatever weapon they want without us finding out whether they’rea criminal or not.
  
Anderson Cooper:  Kimberly, thank you for being here.  I appreciate it.
You talked about Chicago, and there’s a lot of folks from Chicago here tonight.  I want you tomeet -- or I want everybody to meet, because I know you’ve met her before, Cleo Pendleton. She’s sitting over there.  And I should point out -- I think I said it earlier -- 55 shootings inChicago in just the past seven days.  Cleo Pendleton, her daughter, Hadiya, performed at yoursecond inauguration.  She was shot to death a little more than a week later.  She was 15years old.  She was an honor student, a majorette.  And you being here tonight honors her, sothank you very much for being here.  What’s your question to the President?
Question:  Well, I want to say thank you, first of all, for making it more difficult for guns toget in the hands of those that shouldn’t have them.  Thank you for the action you took onTuesday.  But I want to ask a question -- how can we stop the trafficking of guns from stateswith looser gun laws into states with tougher gun laws?  Because I believe that’s the caseoften in Chicago, and possibly the source of the gun that shot and murdered my daughter.
President Obama:  Well, first of all, it’s great to see you again.  And part of the reason thatwe do this is because when you meet parents of wonderful young people and they tell theirstories, at least for me, I think of Malia and I think of Sasha and I think of my nieces and Ithink of my nephews.  And the pain that any of us go through with a loss like that isextraordinary. And I couldn’t be prouder of the families who are here representing both sidesbut who’ve been affected in those ways.
If we are able to set up a strong background check system -- and my proposal, by the way,includes hiring -- having the FBI hire a couple hundred more people to help processbackground checks, because they’re big numbers, you’re talking about 20 million checks thatare getting done every year -- hiring 200,000 -- or 200 more ATF agents to be able to go afterunscrupulous gun dealers, then that will apply across the country.
And so, some states may have laws that allow for conceal-and -carry; some states may not. There’s still going to be differences.  But what will at least be consistent across the country isthat it’s a little bit harder to get a gun. Now, we can’t guarantee that criminals are not goingto have ways of getting guns.  But, for example, it may be a little more difficult and a littlemore expensive, and the laws of supply and demand mean that if something is harder to getand it’s a little more expensive to get, then fewer people get them.  And that, in and of itself,could make a difference.
So if somebody is a straw purchaser -- and what that means is they don’t intend the guns forthemselves, they intend to resell them to somebody else -- they go to a gun show in Indiana,where right now they don’t have to do a background check, load up a van, and open up thatvan and sell them to kids in gangs in Chicago -- if now that person has to go through abackground check, they’ve got to register, ATF has the capacity then to find out if and when agun is used in a crime in Chicago where that gun had come from.  And now you know here’ssomebody who seems to be willing to sell a gun to a 15-year-old who had a known record.
  
Anderson Cooper:   But you’re only going to be asking people to get a license and dobackground checks if they give out business cards, if they’re selling weapons that are in theoriginal packaging.  Somebody just walking around a gun show selling a weapon is notnecessarily going to have to register.
President Obama:  No -- look, there’s going to be a case-by-case evaluation:  Are they onan ongoing basis making a profit and are they repeatedly selling firearms.
Anderson Cooper:   I want you to meet Sheriff Paul Babeu of Pinal County, Arizona.  He’s aRepublican running for Congress.  After the recent terror attacks, Sheriff, I know you’ve beentelling citizens to arm themselves to protect their families.  What’s your question to thePresident?
Question:  Well, first, deputies’ slow response time has been mentioned a couple times.  Iwant to be clear that my deputies have a very fast emergency response --
President Obama:  I’m sure that’s true.
Question:  Yes.  Mr. President, you’ve said you’ve been thwarted by -- frustrated byCongress.  As a sheriff, I oftentimes get frustrated.  But I don’t make the laws and I’ve swornan oath to enforce the law, to uphold the Constitution, the same oath you’ve taken.  And thetalk and why we’re here is all these mass shootings, and yet you’ve said in your executiveaction it wouldn’t have solved even one of these or the terrorist attack --
President Obama:  No, I didn’t say that.  I didn’t say that it wouldn’t solve one.
Question:   Well, looking at the information, what would it have solved?  Now, knowing --
Anderson Cooper:   None of the recent mass shootings, I should point out, none of the gunswere purchased from an unlicensed dealer.
Question:  Correct.  And that’s what I’m speaking to -- the executive action that youmentioned earlier.  Aspirin, toys, or cars, they’re not written about in the Constitution.  I wantto know -- and I think all of us really want to get to the solution, and you said don’t talk pasteach other -- what would you have done to prevent these mass shootings and the terroristattack?  And how do we get those with mental illness and criminals -- that’s the real problemhere -- how are we going to get them to follow the laws?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, appreciate your service.  Good luck on your race.  Yousure you want to go to Congress?
Question:   I don’t want to [inaudible] --
  
President Obama:  I’m sure that’s true.  That will hurt you.  And I’m sure it’s a Republicandistrict. Look, crime is always going to be with us.  So I think it’s really important for us not tosuggest that if we can’t solve every crime, we shouldn’t try to solve any crimes.
And the problem when we talk about that guns don’t kill people; people kill people, or it’sprimarily a mental health problem, or it’s a criminal and evil problem and that’s what we haveto get at -- all of us are interested in fighting crime.  I’m very proud of the fact that violentcrime rates have continued to go down during the course of my presidency.  I’ve got anAttorney General, an FBI that works very closely with local law enforcement in busting upcrime rings all the time.  That’s a huge priority to us.  And we’re probably providing grants toyour department to help go after criminals.
The challenge we have is that in many instances, you don’t know ahead of time who’s going tobe the criminal.  It’s not as if criminals walk around with a label saying, “I’m a criminal.”  And,by the way, the young man who killed those kids in Newtown, he didn’t have a criminalrecord, and so we didn’t know ahead of time, necessarily, that he was going to do somethinglike that. But he was able to have access to an arsenal that allowed him in very short order tokill an entire classroom of small children.  And so the question then becomes, are there waysfor us -- since we can’t identify that person all the time, are there ways for us to make it lesslethal when something like that happens?
And I mentioned this during my speech at the White House a couple of days ago.  Rightaround the time of Newtown, in China, a guy who was obviously similarly deranged had aknife and started attacking a bunch of schoolchildren.  About the same number were cut orstabbed by this guy.  But most of them survived.  And the reason was because he wasn’tyielding a semi-automatic.
So the main point I think that I want to make here is that everybody here is in favor of goingafter criminals, locking them up, making sure that we’re creating an environment where kidsdon’t turn into criminals and providing the support that they need.  Those are all importantthings.  Nobody is saying we need to be going soft on criminals.
What we do have to make sure of is that we don’t make it so easy for them to have access todeadly weapons.  In neighborhoods like Chicago -- I keep on using Chicago -- this is all acrossthe country.  You go into any neighborhood, it used to be that parents would see some kidsmessing around on the corner and they’d say, “Yo” -- even if they weren’t the parent of thosechildren -- “go back inside, stop doing that.”  And over time, it was a lot harder to disciplinesomebody else’s kid and have the community maintain order, or talk to police officers ifsomebody is doing something wrong, because now somebody is worried about getting shot.
And if we can create an environment that’s just a little bit safer in those communities, that willhelp.  And if it doesn’t infringe on your Second Amendment rights, and it doesn’t infringe onyour Second Amendment rights, and you’re still able to get a firearm for your protection, whywouldn’t we want to do that?
  
Anderson Cooper:   We’ve got to take a break.  We’re going to take a quick break.  Our livetown hall conversation, “Guns in America,” with President Barack Obama continues right afterthis.
[commercial break]
Anderson Cooper:   And welcome back.  We’re live at George Mason University in Fairfax,Virginia, continuing our live town hall conversation with President Barack Obama, “Guns InAmerica,” talking to voices from all sides of the issue, including the President.
You made your announcement just the other day in a very obviously emotional ceremony atthe White House.  And I want to play just a moment from it for those who haven’t seen it.
[Video is shown.]
I think a lot of people were surprised by that moment.
President Obama:  I was, too, actually.  I visited Newtown two days after what happened,so it was still very raw.  It’s the only time I’ve ever seen Secret Service cry on duty.  And itwasn’t just the parents.  You had siblings -- 10-year-olds, 8-year-olds, 3-year-olds, who, insome cases, didn’t even understand that their brother or sister weren’t going to be cominghome.  And I’ve said this before -- it continues to haunt me.  It was one of the worst days ofmy presidency.
But, look, I want to emphasize that there are a lot of tragedies that happen out there as aconsequence of the victims of crime.  There are police officers who are out there laying downtheir lives to protect us every single day.  And tears are appropriate for them, as well, and Ivisit with those families, as well -- victims of terrorism, soldiers coming home.
There’s a lot of heartache out there.  And I don’t suggest that this is the only kind ofheartache we should be working on. I spent a lot of time and a lot of hours -- in fact, a lotmore hours than I spend on this -- trying to prevent terrorist attacks.  I spend a lot of timeand a lot of hours trying to make sure that we’re continuing to reduce our crime rate.
There are a whole bunch of other answers that are just as important when it comes to makingsure that the streets of places like Chicago and Baltimore are safer.  Making sure kids get agood early childhood education.  Making sure that we’re teaching conflict resolution thatdoesn’t involve violence.  Making sure that faith communities are able to reach out to youngpeople and intervene in timely ways.
So this is not a recipe for solving every problem.  Again, I just want to emphasize that thegoal here is just to make progress.  And it’s interesting, as I enter into my last year asPresident, I could not be prouder of the work that we’ve done.
  
But it also makes you really humble, because you realize that change takes a long time and alot of the work you do is just to incrementally make things better so that, 10 years from now,20 years from now, the crime rate has gone down.
That’s not just because of my Administration.  That’s the groundwork that was laid by a bunchof good work by law enforcement and others for years, across Administrations, on a bipartisanbasis. The same is true with traffic safety.  The same is true with advances in medicine.  Thesame can be true with this if we stop exaggerating or mischaracterizing the positions of eitherside and we just come up with some sensible areas that people agree with.  Backgroundchecks are an example:  The majority of gun owners agree with this.
Anderson Cooper:   You talk about faith communities.  Father Michael Pfleger is here.  Iknow you know him well.  He’s a Roman Catholic priest in Chicago.  For those who don’tknow, his church is St. Sabina on the South Side of Chicago.  I was there about a month ago. It was a great honor to be there.  Father, you’ve given a lot of eulogies for a lot of kids in yourcommunity.  Far too many over the 40 years that you have been there.  What your questionfor the President?
Question:  Mr. President, first of all, thank you for your courage and your passion, and keeppushing.  I happen to be from one of those cities where violence is not going down.  Not only,as Anderson mentioned, the 55 shot, there’s been 11 killed in seven days in Chicago.  Andone of the main reasons for that is the easy access to guns.  It’s easier to get a gun in myneighborhood than it is a computer.  And the reality is, is because many of those guns havebeen bought legally.  And I understand why people are pushing against you, because Iunderstand it’s a business and it’s about a business, and so if we cut back the easy access toguns, less money for gun manufacturers, less money for the gun lobby.  I understand thebusiness of it.  But that business is causing blood and the kids that are dying in Chicago.  Andfor many years, nobody even cared about Chicago because the violence is primarily black andbrown.
The reality is that I don’t understand why we can’t title guns just like cars.  If I have a car andI give it to you, Mr. President, and I don’t transfer a title and you’re in an accident, it’s onme.  We don’t take cars away by putting titles on them.  Why can’t we do that with guns andevery gun in America?  So if somebody who’s buying 200 guns, selling them on the streets, ifthey can’t transfer those titles, then they’re going to be held responsible for the guns thatthey sell.
President Obama:  Well, Father Mike, first of all, for those of you who don’t know him, hasbeen working since before I moved to Chicago, and I was a 23-year-old when I first met him. And somehow I aged and he didn’t. 
Anderson Cooper:   Your gray hair is not going back, I can tell you from experience.
  
President Obama:  He was always the best-looking priest in Chicago.   But Father Pflegerhas done heroic work at St. Sabina Parish.
Issues like licensing, registration, that’s an area where there’s just not enough nationalconsensus at this stage to even consider it.  And part of it is, is people’s concern that thatbecomes a prelude to taking people’s guns away.  I mean, part of the challenge in this is thatthe gun debate gets wrapped up in broader debates about whether the federal government isoppressive.  And there are conspiracy theories floating around the Internet these days all thetime.  We did a military exercise in Texas, and a whole bunch of folks were sure that this wasthe start of martial law, and were suggesting maybe don’t cooperate with the United StatesArmy in an effort to prepare so that if they get deployed overseas, they can handle it.  Butthat’s how difficult sometimes these debates are.
But I want to pick up on some things where I think there should be consensus.  One of thoseareas that I talked about at the speech, part of the proposal is developing smart guntechnology.  Now, this is an interesting example.  I don’t exactly understand this, and maybethere will be somebody in the audience who explains it to me.  Back in 1997, the CEO of Coltsaid we can design, or are starting to develop guns where you can only use it if you’ve got achip, where you wear a band or a bracelet, and that then protects your 2-year-old or 3-year-
old from picking up the gun and using it.  And a boycott was called against him, and they hadto back off of developing that technology.  The same with Smith & Wesson.  They were in theprocess of developing similar technology, and they were attacked by the NRA as“surrendering.”
Now, to me, this does not make sense.  If you are a gun owner, I would think that you wouldat least want a choice so that if you wanted to purchase a firearm that could only be used byyou -- in part to avoid accidents in your home, in part to make sure that if it’s stolen, it’s notused by a criminal, in part, if there’s an intruder, you pull the gun but somehow it getswrested away from you, that gun can’t be turned on you and used on you -- I would thinkthere might be a market for that.  You could sell that gun.
Now, I’m not saying that necessarily would be the only gun that’s available, but it seems tome that that would be something that in any other area, in any other product, any othercommercial venture, there would be some research and development on that because that’s apromising technology.
It has not been developed primarily because it’s been blocked by either the NRA, which isfunded by gun manufacturers, or other reasons.  In part, what we proposed was, you knowwhat, we’re going to do some of the research.  We’ll work with the private sector.   We’llfigure out whether or not this technology can be developed -- and then give everybody achoice in terms of the kind of firearm that they want to purchase -- because I think that therewill, in fact, be a market for that.  And over time, that’s an example of how we could reducesome of the preventable gun deaths that are out there.
  
Anderson Cooper:   I want to bring in somebody who actually knows a lot about sellingguns.  I want you to meet Kris Jacob.  He’s vice president of the American Firearms RetailersAssociation.  He’s the owner of the Bullseye Indoor Shooting Range and gun store in SanRafael, California.  Kris, it’s great to have you here.  First of all, how is business underPresident Obama?  Because everything I read says gun sales have been going up.  Every timehe talks about guns, gun sales go up.
Question:  It’s been busy.  And certainly I think that shows, as Taya said earlier, that there’sa very serious concern in this country about personal security.  And the sheriff is right -- theydo everything they possibly can to make sure they get there as quickly as they possibly can. And my question is actually focused around law enforcement, as well.  There’s 53,000 licensedgun dealers in the United States who stand behind the counter and say no to people all day.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:  We feel it’s our responsibility to make sure that people who have a criminal past,people who are mentally ill or are having a bad day don’t get possession of firearms.  So weassist law enforcement all the time in the process of making sure that those things don’tchange hands inside our commercial market if they shouldn’t.  It’s a very seriousresponsibility for us, and as a group, we take it very seriously.
My question is around the executive order related to the investigators, the inspectors, theadding of 200 inspectors who are more on the auditing and record-keeping side.  Why not add200 ATF agents on the law enforcement side to keep the criminals and the bad guys out of thestores in the first place?  I mean, the problem seems to me to be -- you mentioned dealerswho are less responsible than others, and certainly it’s possible that those folks are out there,but if we can enforce the laws that already exist, the tens of thousands of gun laws that areon the books right now, it might create a very significant deterrent in just getting thosepeople in the stores.
Anderson Cooper:   Let me also point out the number of ATF agents during yourAdministration has actually declined.  So even if you hired 200 more --
President Obama:  Yes, but not because of my budget.
Anderson Cooper:   But even if you hired 200 more, it will get it to what it was right beforeyou took office.
President Obama:  Absolutely.  Well, look, first of all, there are a whole bunch of responsiblegun dealers out there.  And my hope would be that those gun dealers would support makingsure that everybody is following the same rules that they are.  That’s number one.
  
Number two is we’re not writing a new law.  Only Congress can do that.  This is aboutenforcing existing laws, and closing what has grown into a massive loophole where a hugepercentage of guns -- many of whom end up being traced to crime -- are not going throughthe responsible gun dealers, but are going through irresponsible folks who are not registeredas doing business.  And the whole goal here is to clarify and to put on notice that if you’re abusiness, even if you don’t have bricks and mortar, then you’re supposed to register, you’resupposed to conduct background checks.  So the issue is not where you do it, it’s what you’redoing.  And that should not be something that threatens responsible gun dealers across thecountry.
In terms of the ATF, it is absolutely true that the ATF budget has been shrank because -- hasbeen shrunk -- it’s a little late -- you knew what I meant -- and part of it is because thepoliticizing of this issue.  So many in the Republican Congress feel as if the ATF is not theirfriend, but their enemy.  Part of the story I was telling --
Anderson Cooper:   You said this issue should be politicized, though.
President Obama:  Well, but what I mean by that, Anderson, is, is that they have beenportrayed as trying to take people’s guns away as opposed to trying to make sure that thelaws are enforced.  And one of the most frustrating things that I hear is when people say --who are opposed to any further laws -- why don’t you just enforce the laws that are on thebooks, and those very same members of Congress then cut ATF budgets to make it impossibleto enforce the law.
And by the way, the ATF is a law enforcement agency working under the FBI that is doingenormous work in going after criminals and drug cartels, and have a pretty dangerous job.  Soit’s not as if doing background checks or auditing gun sales is all that they’re doing.
Part of my proposal is also developing better technologies so that we can do tracing of shellswhen a crime is committed in order to figure out who exactly are the perpetrators of the crimeand where did they obtain the weapon.  So there’s a whole bunch of other elements to thisthat are going to be important.  But my hope is, is that responsible gun dealers like yourselfand your organization are going to be supportive of this proposal, because it should actuallyhelp push away unscrupulous dealers and that means more customers for you guys.
Anderson Cooper:   I want to bring in Mark Kelly.  As you know, a former astronaut,husband of former Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, who we’re proud to say is here tonight. Five years ago this week in Tucson, Arizona, Congresswoman Giffords was shot.  Six otherswere killed.  Captain, your question?
Question:  Well, thank you for being here, Mr. President.  As you know, Gabby and I are bothgun owners.  We take gun ownership very seriously and really think about the voices ofresponsible gun owners in this debate.  But I want to follow up to something Father Pflegersaid and your answer to his question, and it’s about expanded background checks.
  
Often, what you hear in the debate of expanding background checks to more gun sales -- and,as you know, Gabby and I are 100 percent behind the concept of somebody getting abackground check before buying a gun -- but when we testified in front of the SenateJudiciary Committee, we heard not only from the gun lobby but from United States senatorsthat expanding background checks will -- not may -- will lead to a registry, which will lead toconfiscation, which will lead to a tyrannical government.
So I would like you to explain, with 350 million guns in 65 million places, households, fromKey West to Alaska -- 350 million objects in 65 million places -- if the federal governmentwanted to confiscate those objects, how would they do that? 
President Obama:  Well, look, first of all, every time I see Gabby, I’m just so thrilledbecause I visited her in the hospital, and, as I mentioned I think in the speech in the WhiteHouse, as we left the hospital then to go to a memorial service, we got word that Gabby hadopened her eyes for the first time.  And we did not think that she was going to be here, andshe is.  And Mark has just been extraordinary.  And, by the way, Mark’s twin brother is up inspace right now and is breaking the record for the longest continuous orbiting of the planet,which is pretty impressive stuff.
What I think Mark is alluding to is what I said earlier -- this notion of a conspiracy out there,and it gets wrapped up in concerns about the federal government.  Now, there’s a long historyof that.  That’s in our DNA.  The United States was born suspicious of some distant authority.
Anderson Cooper:   But let me just jump in -- is it fair to call it a conspiracy?  I mean,there’s a lot of people who really believe this deeply -- that they just don’t trust you.
President Obama:  I’m sorry, Cooper, yes it is fair to call it a conspiracy.  What are yousaying?  Are you suggesting that the notion that we are creating a plot to take everybody’sguns away so that we can impose martial law --
Anderson Cooper:   Not everybody, but there is certainly a lot of people --
President Obama:  -- is a conspiracy?  Yes, that is a conspiracy.  I would hope that youwould agree with that.  Is that controversial except on some websites around the country?
Anderson Cooper:   There are certainly a lot of people who just have a fundamental distrustthat you do not want to get -- go further and further and further down this road.
President Obama:  Look, I mean, I’m only going to be here for another year.  I don’t know -
- when would I have started on this enterprise, right?
  
I come from the state of Illinois, which -- we’ve been talking about Chicago, but downstateIllinois is closer to Kentucky than it is to Chicago.  And everybody hunts down there and a lotof folks own guns.  And so this is not, like, alien territory to me.  I’ve got a lot of friends likeMark who are hunters.  I just came back from Alaska, where I ate a moose that had just beenshot -- and it was pretty good.
So, yes, it is a false notion that I believe is circulated for either political reasons or commercialreasons in order to prevent a coming together among people of goodwill to develop common-
sense rules that will make us safer while preserving the Second Amendment.
And the notion that we can’t agree on some things while not agreeing on others and thereason for that is because, well, the President secretly wants to X would mean that we’d beparalyzed about doing everything.  I mean, maybe when I proposed to make sure that unsafedrugs are taken off the market that, secretly, I’m trying to control the entire drug industry, ortake people’s drugs away.  But probably not.  What’s more likely is I just want to make surethat people are not dying by taking bad drugs.
Anderson Cooper:   You wrote an op-ed that just got published.  A lot of people probablyhave not read it yet.  One of the things you say in it is that you are not going to campaign for,vote for any candidate, regardless of what party they’re in, if they do not support common-
sense gun reform.
President Obama:  Yes.  I meant what I said.  And the reason I said that is this.  Themajority of people in this country are a lot more sensible than what you see in Washington,and the reason that Washington doesn’t work well in part is because the loudest, shrillestvoices, the least compromising, the most powerful or those with the most money have themost influence.
And the way Washington changes is when people vote.  And the way we break the deadlockon this issue is when Congress does not have just a stranglehold on this debate -- or, excuseme -- the NRA does not have a stranglehold on Congress in this debate -- but it is balanced bya whole bunch of folks -- gun owners, law enforcement, the majority of the American people -
- when their voices are heard, then things get done.
The proposals that we’ve put forward are a version -- a lawful, more narrow version -- of whatwas proposed by Joe Manchin and Senator Toomey of Pennsylvania, a Republican and aDemocrat, both of whom get straight-A scores from the NRA.  And somehow, after Newtown,that did not pass the Senate.  The majority of senators wanted it, but 90 percent ofRepublicans voted against it.  And I’ll be honest with you, 90 percent of those senators didn’tdisagree with the proposal, but they were fearful that it was going to affect them during theelection.
  
So all I’m saying is, is that this debate will not change and get balanced out so that lawful gunowners and their Second Amendment rights are protected, but we’re also creating a pathwaytowards a safer set of communities -- it’s not going to change until those who are concernedabout violence are not as focused and disciplined during election time as those who are.  AndI’m going to throw my shoulders behind folks who want to actually solve problems instead ofjust getting a high score from an interest group.
Anderson Cooper:   We have time for one more question.  And we talked about Chicago alittle bit.  We haven't really heard from young people tonight -- no offense to those who havespoken.  I’m in the same category as you all.  Sorry, Father.
President Obama:  You’re a kid.
Anderson Cooper:   There’s a lot of kids, as you know, growing up in Chicago, fearful ofwalking to school, fearful of coming home from school.  A lot of kids have been killed onbuses.  There’s a lot of moms of kids who have been killed in the streets of Chicago.  And Iwant you to meet Trey Bosley.  He’s 18 years old. He’s a high school student.  And his brotherTerrell was shot and killed nearly 10 years ago while he was helping a friend in a churchparking lot.  Terrell would have turned 28 years old on this Tuesday.  What’s your question,Trey?
Question:   As you said, I lost my brother a few years ago -- well, 10 years ago.  And I’vealso lost a countless amount of family members and friends to gun violence, as well.  And justgrowing up as a young black teen in Chicago, where you’re surrounded by not only just gunviolence but police brutality, as well, most of aren’t thinking of our life on a long-term scale. Most of us are either thinking day to day, hour to hour -- for some, even minute to minute.  Iwant to thank you for your stand against gun violence for not only the victims of gun violence,but those on the verge of being victims of gun violence.  And my question to you is, what isyour advice to those youth growing up surrounded by poverty and gun violence?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, Trey, I couldn’t be prouder of you.  And I know -- is thatyour momma next to you?  I know she’s proud of you right now.  So good job, Mom. When Isee you, Terrell, I think I about my own --
Anderson Cooper:   Trey.
President Obama:  Excuse me -- Trey.  When I see you, I think about my own youth,because I wasn’t that different from you.  Probably not as articulate and maybe more of agoof-off.  But the main difference was I lived in a more forgiving environment.  If I screwedup, I wasn’t at risk of getting shot.  I’d get a second chance.  There were a bunch of folks whowere looking out for me, and there weren’t a lot of guns on the streets.  And that’s how allkids should be growing up, wherever they live.
  
My advice to you is to continue to be an outstanding role model for the young ones who arecoming up behind you.  Keep listening to your mom.  Work hard and get an education. Understand that high school and whatever peer pressure or restrictions you’re under right nowwon’t matter by the time you’re a full adult, and what matters is your future.  But what I alsowant to say to you is, is that you’re really important to the future of this country.
And I think it is critical in this debate to understand that it’s not just inner-city kids who are atrisk in these situations.  Out of the 30,000 deaths due to gun violence, about two-thirds ofthem are actually suicides.  That’s part of the reason why we are investing more heavily alsoin mental health under my proposal.
But while the majority of victims of gun homicide are black or Hispanic, the overwhelmingmajority of suicides by young people are white.  And those, too, are tragedies.  Those, too,are preventable.  I’m the father of two outstanding young women, but being a teenager istough.  And we all remember the times where you get confused, you’re angry, and then thenext thing you know, if you have access to a firearm what kind of bad decisions you mightmake.  So those are deaths we also want to prevent.
Accidental shootings are also deaths we want to prevent.  And we’re not going to prevent allof them.  But we can do better.  We’re not going to, through this initiative alone, solve all theproblems of inner-city crime.  Some of that, as I said, has to do with investing in thesecommunities and making sure there’s good education and jobs and opportunity -- and greatparents, and moral responsibility, and ethical behavior, and instilling that in our kids -- that’sgoing to be important.
So this is not a proposal to solve every problem.  It’s a modest way of us getting started onimproving the prospects of young men and young women like you, the same way we try toimprove every other aspect of our lives.  That’s all it is.
And if we get started -- as I said before, it used to be people didn’t wear seatbelts, didn’t haveairbags.  It takes 20, 30 years, but you look and then you realize all these amazing lives ofyoung people like this who are contributing to our society because we came together in apractical way, looking at evidence, looking at data, and figured out how can we make thatwork better.
Right now, Congress prohibits us even studying through the Center for Disease Control waysin which we could reduce gun violence.  That’s how crazy this thing has become.  Let’s at leastfigure out what works.  And some of the proposals that I’m making may turn out are not aseffective as others.  But at least let’s figure it out, let’s try some things.  Let’s not just assumethat -- every few weeks there’s a mass shooting that gets publicity, every few months there’sone that gets national publicity, every day there are a whole bunch of folks shot on streetsaround the country that we don’t even hear about.  That is not something that we can besatisfied with.
  
And part of my faith and hope in America is just that -- not that we achieve a perfect union,but that we get better.  And we can do better than we’re doing right now if we come together.
Thank you.
Anderson Cooper:   Mr. President, thank you very much for your time.
President Obama:  Appreciate it very much.
