Good morning, everybody. I wanted to take just a few minutes to update the American peopleon the attempted terrorist attack that occurred on Christmas Day and the steps we're takingto ensure the safety and security of the country.
The investigation's ongoing. And I spoke again this morning with Attorney General Eric Holder,the secretary of homeland security, Janet Napolitano, and my counterterrorism and homelandsecurity adviser, John Brennan. I asked them to keep -- continue monitoring the situation tokeep the American people and members of Congress informed.
Now, here's what we know so far: On Christmas Day, Northwest Airlines Flight 253 was enroute from Amsterdam, Netherlands, to Detroit. As the plane made its final approach toDetroit Metropolitan Airport, a passenger allegedly tried to ignite an explosive device on hisbody, setting off a fire. Thanks to the quick and heroic actions of passengers and crew, thesuspect was immediately subdued, the fire was put out, and the plane landed safely. Thesuspect is now in custody and has been charged with attempting to destroy an aircraft. And afull investigation has been launched into this attempted act of terrorism, and we will not restuntil we find all who were involved and hold them accountable.
Now, this was a serious reminder of the dangers that we face and the nature of those whothreaten our homeland. Had the suspect succeeded in bringing down that plane, it could havekilled nearly 300 passengers and crew, innocent civilians preparing to celebrate the holidayswith their families and friends. The American people should be assured that we are doingeverything in our power to keep you and your family safe and secure during this busy holidayseason. 

Since I was first notified of this incident, I've ordered the following actions to be taken toprotect the American people and to secure air travel. 
First, I directed that we take immediate steps to ensure the safety of the traveling public. Wemade sure that all flights still in the air were secure and could land safely. We immediatelyenhanced screening and security procedures for all flights, domestic and international. Weadded federal air marshals to flights entering and leaving the United States. And we'reworking closely in this country, federal, state and local law enforcement, with our internationalpartners.
Second, I've ordered two important reviews, because it's absolutely critical that we learn fromthis incident and take the necessary measures to prevent future acts of terrorism.
The first review involves our watch list system, which our government has had in place formany years to identify known and suspected terrorists so that we can prevent their entry intothe United States. Apparently the suspect in the Christmas incident was in this system, butnot on a watch list, such as the so-called no-fly list. So I have ordered a thorough review, notonly of how information related to the subject was handled, but of the overall watch listsystem and how it can be strengthened.
The second review will examine all screening policies, technologies, and procedures related toair travel. We need to determine just how the suspect was able to bring dangerous explosivesaboard an aircraft and what additional steps we can take to thwart future attacks.
Third, I've directed my national security team to keep up the pressure on those who wouldattack our country. We do not yet have all the answers about this latest attempt, but thosewho would slaughter innocent men, women, and children must know that the United Stateswill more -- do more than simply strengthen our defenses. We will continue to use everyelement of our national power to disrupt, to dismantle, and defeat the violent extremists whothreaten us, whether they are from Afghanistan or Pakistan, Yemen or Somalia, or anywherewhere they are plotting attacks against the U.S. homeland.
Finally, the American people should remain vigilant, but also be confident. Those plottingagainst us seek not only to undermine our security, but also the open society and the valuesthat we cherish as Americans. This incident, like several that have preceded it, demonstratesthat an alert and courageous citizenry are far more resilient than an isolated extremist.
As a nation, we will do everything in our power to protect our country. As Americans, we willnever give in to fear or division. We will be guided by our hopes, our unity, and our deeplyheld values.
That's who we are as Americans.

That's what our brave men and women in uniform are standing up for as they spend theholidays in harm's way.
And we will continue to do everything that we can to keep America safe in the new year andbeyond.
Before I leave, let me also briefly address the events that have taken place over the last fewdays in the Islamic Republic of Iran. The United States joins with the international communityin strongly condemning the violent and unjust suppression of innocent Iranian citizens, whichhas apparently resulted in detentions, injuries, and even death.
For months, the Iranian people have sought nothing more than to exercise their universalrights. Each time they have done so, they have been met with the iron fist of brutality, evenon solemn occasions and holy days. And each time that has happened, the world has watchedwith deep admiration for the courage and the conviction of the Iranian people who are part ofIran's great and enduring civilization.
What's taking place within Iran is not about the United States or any other country. It's aboutthe Iranian people and their aspirations for justice and a better life for themselves. And thedecision of Iran's leaders to govern through fear and tyranny will not succeed in making thoseaspirations go away.
As I said in Oslo, it's telling when governments fear the aspirations [of] their own people morethan the power of any other nation.
Along with all free nations, the United States stands with those who seek their universalrights. We call upon the Iranian government to abide by the international obligations that ithas to respect the rights of its own people.
We call for the immediate release of all who have been unjustly detained within Iran.
We will continue to bear witness to the extraordinary events that are taking place there. AndI'm confident that history will be on the side of those who seek justice.
Thank you very much, everybody. And happy New Year.