At the dawn of our Republic, a small, secret surveillance committee borne out of the "TheSons of Liberty" was established in Boston.  And the group’s members included Paul Revere. At night, they would patrol the streets, reporting back any signs that the British werepreparing raids against America’s early Patriots.
Throughout American history, intelligence has helped secure our country and our freedoms. In the Civil War, Union balloon reconnaissance tracked the size of Confederate armies bycounting the number of campfires.  In World War II, code-breakers gave us insights intoJapanese war plans, and when Patton marched across Europe, intercepted communicationshelped save the lives of his troops.  After the war, the rise of the Iron Curtain and nuclearweapons only increased the need for sustained intelligence gathering.  And so, in the earlydays of the Cold War, President Truman created the National Security Agency, or NSA, to giveus insights into the Soviet bloc, and provide our leaders with information they needed toconfront aggression and avert catastrophe.
Throughout this evolution, we benefited from both our Constitution and our traditions oflimited government.  U.S. intelligence agencies were anchored in a system of checks andbalances -- with oversight from elected leaders, and protections for ordinary citizens. Meanwhile, totalitarian states like East Germany offered a cautionary tale of what couldhappen when vast, unchecked surveillance turned citizens into informers, and persecutedpeople for what they said in the privacy of their own homes.
  
In fact, even the United States proved not to be immune to the abuse of surveillance.  And inthe 1960s, government spied on civil rights leaders and critics of the Vietnam War.  And partlyin response to these revelations, additional laws were established in the 1970s to ensure thatour intelligence capabilities could not be misused against our citizens.  In the long, twilightstruggle against Communism, we had been reminded that the very liberties that we sought topreserve could not be sacrificed at the altar of national security.
If the fall of the Soviet Union left America without a competing superpower, emerging threatsfrom terrorist groups, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction placed new and insome ways more complicated demands on our intelligence agencies.  Globalization and theInternet made these threats more acute, as technology erased borders and empoweredindividuals to project great violence, as well as great good.  Moreover, these new threatsraised new legal and new policy questions.  For while few doubted the legitimacy of spying onhostile states, our framework of laws was not fully adapted to prevent terrorist attacks byindividuals acting on their own, or acting in small, ideologically driven groups on behalf of aforeign power.
The horror of September 11th brought all these issues to the fore.  Across the politicalspectrum, Americans recognized that we had to adapt to a world in which a bomb could bebuilt in a basement, and our electric grid could be shut down by operators an ocean away. We were shaken by the signs we had missed leading up to the attacks -- how the hijackershad made phone calls to known extremists and traveled to suspicious places.  So wedemanded that our intelligence community improve its capabilities, and that law enforcementchange practices to focus more on preventing attacks before they happen than prosecutingterrorists after an attack.
It is hard to overstate the transformation America’s intelligence community had to go throughafter 9/11.  Our agencies suddenly needed to do far more than the traditional mission ofmonitoring hostile powers and gathering information for policymakers.  Instead, they werenow asked to identify and target plotters in some of the most remote parts of the world, andto anticipate the actions of networks that, by their very nature, cannot be easily penetratedwith spies or informants.
And it is a testimony to the hard work and dedication of the men and women of ourintelligence community that over the past decade we’ve made enormous strides in fulfillingthis mission.  Today, new capabilities allow intelligence agencies to track who a terrorist is incontact with, and follow the trail of his travel or his funding.  New laws allow information to becollected and shared more quickly and effectively between federal agencies, and state andlocal law enforcement.  Relationships with foreign intelligence services have expanded, andour capacity to repel cyber-attacks have been strengthened.  And taken together, theseefforts have prevented multiple attacks and saved innocent lives -- not just here in the UnitedStates, but around the globe.
  
And yet, in our rush to respond to a very real and novel set of threats, the risk of governmentoverreach -- the possibility that we lose some of our core liberties in pursuit of security -- alsobecame more pronounced.  We saw, in the immediate aftermath of 9/11, our governmentengaged in enhanced interrogation techniques that contradicted our values.  As a Senator, Iwas critical of several practices, such as warrantless wiretaps.  And all too often newauthorities were instituted without adequate public debate.
Through a combination of action by the courts, increased congressional oversight, andadjustments by the previous administration, some of the worst excesses that emerged after9/11 were curbed by the time I took office.  But a variety of factors have continued tocomplicate America’s efforts to both defend our nation and uphold our civil liberties.
First, the same technological advances that allow U.S. intelligence agencies to pinpoint an alQaeda cell in Yemen or an email between two terrorists in the Sahel also mean that manyroutine communications around the world are within our reach.  And at a time when more andmore of our lives are digital, that prospect is disquieting for all of us.
Second, the combination of increased digital information and powerful supercomputers offersintelligence agencies the possibility of sifting through massive amounts of bulk data to identifypatterns or pursue leads that may thwart impending threats.  It’s a powerful tool.  But thegovernment collection and storage of such bulk data also creates a potential for abuse.
Third, the legal safeguards that restrict surveillance against U.S. persons without a warrant donot apply to foreign persons overseas.  This is not unique to America; few, if any, spyagencies around the world constrain their activities beyond their own borders.  And the wholepoint of intelligence is to obtain information that is not publicly available.  But America’scapabilities are unique, and the power of new technologies means that there are fewer andfewer technical constraints on what we can do.  That places a special obligation on us to asktough questions about what we should do.
And finally, intelligence agencies cannot function without secrecy, which makes their work lesssubject to public debate.  Yet there is an inevitable bias not only within the intelligencecommunity, but among all of us who are responsible for national security, to collect moreinformation about the world, not less.  So in the absence of institutional requirements forregular debate -- and oversight that is public, as well as private or classified -- the danger ofgovernment overreach becomes more acute.  And this is particularly true when surveillancetechnology and our reliance on digital information is evolving much faster than our laws.
For all these reasons, I maintained a healthy skepticism toward our surveillance programsafter I became President.  I ordered that our programs be reviewed by my national securityteam and our lawyers, and in some cases I ordered changes in how we did business.  Weincreased oversight and auditing, including new structures aimed at compliance.  Improvedrules were proposed by the government and approved by the Foreign Intelligence SurveillanceCourt.  And we sought to keep Congress continually updated on these activities.
  
What I did not do is stop these programs wholesale -- not only because I felt that they madeus more secure, but also because nothing in that initial review, and nothing that I havelearned since, indicated that our intelligence community has sought to violate the law or iscavalier about the civil liberties of their fellow citizens.
To the contrary, in an extraordinarily difficult job -- one in which actions are second-guessed,success is unreported, and failure can be catastrophic -- the men and women of theintelligence community, including the NSA, consistently follow protocols designed to protectthe privacy of ordinary people.  They’re not abusing authorities in order to listen to yourprivate phone calls or read your emails.  When mistakes are made -- which is inevitable in anylarge and complicated human enterprise -- they correct those mistakes.  Laboring inobscurity, often unable to discuss their work even with family and friends, the men andwomen at the NSA know that if another 9/11 or massive cyber-attack occurs, they will beasked, by Congress and the media, why they failed to connect the dots.  What sustains thosewho work at NSA and our other intelligence agencies through all these pressures is theknowledge that their professionalism and dedication play a central role in the defense of ournation.
Now, to say that our intelligence community follows the law, and is staffed by patriots, is notto suggest that I or others in my administration felt complacent about the potential impact ofthese programs.  Those of us who hold office in America have a responsibility to ourConstitution, and while I was confident in the integrity of those who lead our intelligencecommunity, it was clear to me in observing our intelligence operations on a regular basis thatchanges in our technological capabilities were raising new questions about the privacysafeguards currently in place.
Moreover, after an extended review of our use of drones in the fight against terroristnetworks, I believed a fresh examination of our surveillance programs was a necessary nextstep in our effort to get off the open-ended war footing that we’ve maintained since 9/11. And for these reasons, I indicated in a speech at the National Defense University last May thatwe needed a more robust public discussion about the balance between security and liberty. Of course, what I did not know at the time is that within weeks of my speech, an avalanche ofunauthorized disclosures would spark controversies at home and abroad that have continuedto this day.
And given the fact of an open investigation, I’m not going to dwell on Mr. Snowden’s actionsor his motivations; I will say that our nation’s defense depends in part on the fidelity of thoseentrusted with our nation’s secrets.  If any individual who objects to government policy cantake it into their own hands to publicly disclose classified information, then we will not be ableto keep our people safe, or conduct foreign policy.  Moreover, the sensational way in whichthese disclosures have come out has often shed more heat than light, while revealing methodsto our adversaries that could impact our operations in ways that we may not fully understandfor years to come.
  
Regardless of how we got here, though, the task before us now is greater than simplyrepairing the damage done to our operations or preventing more disclosures from taking placein the future.  Instead, we have to make some important decisions about how to protectourselves and sustain our leadership in the world, while upholding the civil liberties andprivacy protections that our ideals and our Constitution require.  We need to do so not onlybecause it is right, but because the challenges posed by threats like terrorism andproliferation and cyber-attacks are not going away any time soon.  They are going to continueto be a major problem.  And for our intelligence community to be effective over the long haul,we must maintain the trust of the American people, and people around the world.
This effort will not be completed overnight, and given the pace of technological change, weshouldn’t expect this to be the last time America has this debate.  But I want the Americanpeople to know that the work has begun.  Over the last six months, I created an outsideReview Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies to make recommendationsfor reform.  I consulted with the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, created byCongress.  I’ve listened to foreign partners, privacy advocates, and industry leaders.  Myadministration has spent countless hours considering how to approach intelligence in this eraof diffuse threats and technological revolution.  So before outlining specific changes that I’veordered, let me make a few broad observations that have emerged from this process.
First, everyone who has looked at these problems, including skeptics of existing programs,recognizes that we have real enemies and threats, and that intelligence serves a vital role inconfronting them.  We cannot prevent terrorist attacks or cyber threats without somecapability to penetrate digital communications -- whether it’s to unravel a terrorist plot; tointercept malware that targets a stock exchange; to make sure air traffic control systems arenot compromised; or to ensure that hackers do not empty your bank accounts.  We areexpected to protect the American people; that requires us to have capabilities in this field.
Moreover, we cannot unilaterally disarm our intelligence agencies.  There is a reason whyBlackBerrys and iPhones are not allowed in the White House Situation Room.  We know thatthe intelligence services of other countries -- including some who feign surprise over theSnowden disclosures -- are constantly probing our government and private sector networks,and accelerating programs to listen to our conversations, and intercept our emails, andcompromise our systems.  We know that.
Meanwhile, a number of countries, including some who have loudly criticized the NSA,privately acknowledge that America has special responsibilities as the world’s onlysuperpower; that our intelligence capabilities are critical to meeting these responsibilities, andthat they themselves have relied on the information we obtain to protect their own people.
Second, just as ardent civil libertarians recognize the need for robust intelligence capabilities,those with responsibilities for our national security readily acknowledge the potential for abuseas intelligence capabilities advance and more and more private information is digitized.
  
After all, the folks at NSA and other intelligence agencies are our neighbors.  They're ourfriends and family.  They’ve got electronic bank and medical records like everybody else. They have kids on Facebook and Instagram, and they know, more than most of us, thevulnerabilities to privacy that exist in a world where transactions are recorded, and emails andtext and messages are stored, and even our movements can increasingly be tracked throughthe GPS on our phones.
Third, there was a recognition by all who participated in these reviews that the challenges toour privacy do not come from government alone.  Corporations of all shapes and sizes trackwhat you buy, store and analyze our data, and use it for commercial purposes; that’s howthose targeted ads pop up on your computer and your smartphone periodically.  But all of usunderstand that the standards for government surveillance must be higher.  Given the uniquepower of the state, it is not enough for leaders to say:  Trust us, we won’t abuse the data wecollect.  For history has too many examples when that trust has been breached.  Our systemof government is built on the premise that our liberty cannot depend on the good intentions ofthose in power; it depends on the law to constrain those in power.
I make these observations to underscore that the basic values of most Americans when itcomes to questions of surveillance and privacy converge a lot more than the crudecharacterizations that have emerged over the last several months.  Those who are troubled byour existing programs are not interested in repeating the tragedy of 9/11, and those whodefend these programs are not dismissive of civil liberties.
The challenge is getting the details right, and that is not simple.  In fact, during the course ofour review, I have often reminded myself I would not be where I am today were it not for thecourage of dissidents like Dr. King, who were spied upon by their own government.  And asPresident, a President who looks at intelligence every morning, I also can’t help but bereminded that America must be vigilant in the face of threats.
Fortunately, by focusing on facts and specifics rather than speculation and hypotheticals, thisreview process has given me -- and hopefully the American people -- some clear direction forchange.  And today, I can announce a series of concrete and substantial reforms that myadministration intends to adopt administratively or will seek to codify with Congress.
First, I have approved a new presidential directive for our signals intelligence activities both athome and abroad.  This guidance will strengthen executive branch oversight of ourintelligence activities.  It will ensure that we take into account our security requirements, butalso our alliances; our trade and investment relationships, including the concerns of Americancompanies; and our commitment to privacy and basic liberties.  And we will review decisionsabout intelligence priorities and sensitive targets on an annual basis so that our actions areregularly scrutinized by my senior national security team.
  
Second, we will reform programs and procedures in place to provide greater transparency toour surveillance activities, and fortify the safeguards that protect the privacy of U.S. persons. Since we began this review, including information being released today, we have declassifiedover 40 opinions and orders of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which providesjudicial review of some of our most sensitive intelligence activities -- including the Section 702program targeting foreign individuals overseas, and the Section 215 telephone metadataprogram.
And going forward, I’m directing the Director of National Intelligence, in consultation with theAttorney General, to annually review for the purposes of declassification any future opinions ofthe court with broad privacy implications, and to report to me and to Congress on theseefforts.  To ensure that the court hears a broader range of privacy perspectives, I am alsocalling on Congress to authorize the establishment of a panel of advocates from outsidegovernment to provide an independent voice in significant cases before the ForeignIntelligence Surveillance Court.
Third, we will provide additional protections for activities conducted under Section 702, whichallows the government to intercept the communications of foreign targets overseas who haveinformation that’s important for our national security.  Specifically, I am asking the AttorneyGeneral and DNI to institute reforms that place additional restrictions on government’s abilityto retain, search, and use in criminal cases communications between Americans and foreigncitizens incidentally collected under Section 702.
Fourth, in investigating threats, the FBI also relies on what's called national security letters,which can require companies to provide specific and limited information to the governmentwithout disclosing the orders to the subject of the investigation.  These are cases in which it'simportant that the subject of the investigation, such as a possible terrorist or spy, isn’t tippedoff.  But we can and should be more transparent in how government uses this authority.
I have therefore directed the Attorney General to amend how we use national security lettersso that this secrecy will not be indefinite, so that it will terminate within a fixed time unlessthe government demonstrates a real need for further secrecy.  We will also enablecommunications providers to make public more information than ever before about the ordersthat they have received to provide data to the government.
This brings me to the program that has generated the most controversy these past fewmonths -- the bulk collection of telephone records under Section 215.  Let me repeat what Isaid when this story first broke:  This program does not involve the content of phone calls, orthe names of people making calls.  Instead, it provides a record of phone numbers and thetimes and lengths of calls -- metadata that can be queried if and when we have a reasonablesuspicion that a particular number is linked to a terrorist organization.
  
Why is this necessary?  The program grew out of a desire to address a gap identified after9/11.  One of the 9/11 hijackers -- Khalid al-Mihdhar -- made a phone call from San Diego toa known al Qaeda safe-house in Yemen.  NSA saw that call, but it could not see that the callwas coming from an individual already in the United States.  The telephone metadata programunder Section 215 was designed to map the communications of terrorists so we can see whothey may be in contact with as quickly as possible.  And this capability could also provevaluable in a crisis.  For example, if a bomb goes off in one of our cities and law enforcementis racing to determine whether a network is poised to conduct additional attacks, time is of theessence.  Being able to quickly review phone connections to assess whether a network existsis critical to that effort.
In sum, the program does not involve the NSA examining the phone records of ordinaryAmericans.  Rather, it consolidates these records into a database that the government canquery if it has a specific lead -- a consolidation of phone records that the companies alreadyretained for business purposes.  The review group turned up no indication that this databasehas been intentionally abused.  And I believe it is important that the capability that thisprogram is designed to meet is preserved.
Having said that, I believe critics are right to point out that without proper safeguards, thistype of program could be used to yield more information about our private lives, and open thedoor to more intrusive bulk collection programs in the future.  They’re also right to point outthat although the telephone bulk collection program was subject to oversight by the ForeignIntelligence Surveillance Court and has been reauthorized repeatedly by Congress, it hasnever been subject to vigorous public debate.
For all these reasons, I believe we need a new approach.  I am therefore ordering a transitionthat will end the Section 215 bulk metadata program as it currently exists, and establish amechanism that preserves the capabilities we need without the government holding this bulkmetadata.
This will not be simple.  The review group recommended that our current approach bereplaced by one in which the providers or a third party retain the bulk records, withgovernment accessing information as needed.  Both of these options pose difficult problems. Relying solely on the records of multiple providers, for example, could require companies toalter their procedures in ways that raise new privacy concerns.  On the other hand, any thirdparty maintaining a single, consolidated database would be carrying out what is essentially agovernment function but with more expense, more legal ambiguity, potentially lessaccountability -- all of which would have a doubtful impact on increasing public confidencethat their privacy is being protected.
During the review process, some suggested that we may also be able to preserve thecapabilities we need through a combination of existing authorities, better information sharing,and recent technological advances.  But more work needs to be done to determine exactlyhow this system might work.
  
Because of the challenges involved, I’ve ordered that the transition away from the existingprogram will proceed in two steps.  Effective immediately, we will only pursue phone calls thatare two steps removed from a number associated with a terrorist organization instead of thecurrent three.  And I have directed the Attorney General to work with the Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance Court so that during this transition period, the database can be queried only aftera judicial finding or in the case of a true emergency.
Next, step two, I have instructed the intelligence community and the Attorney General to usethis transition period to develop options for a new approach that can match the capabilitiesand fill the gaps that the Section 215 program was designed to address without thegovernment holding this metadata itself.  They will report back to me with options foralternative approaches before the program comes up for reauthorization on March 28th.  Andduring this period, I will consult with the relevant committees in Congress to seek their views,and then seek congressional authorization for the new program as needed.
Now, the reforms I’m proposing today should give the American people greater confidencethat their rights are being protected, even as our intelligence and law enforcement agenciesmaintain the tools they need to keep us safe.  And I recognize that there are additional issuesthat require further debate.  For example, some who participated in our review, as well assome members of Congress, would like to see more sweeping reforms to the use of nationalsecurity letters so that we have to go to a judge each time before issuing these requests. Here, I have concerns that we should not set a standard for terrorism investigations that ishigher than those involved in investigating an ordinary crime.  But I agree that greateroversight on the use of these letters may be appropriate, and I’m prepared to work withCongress on this issue.
There are also those who would like to see different changes to the FISA Court than the onesI’ve proposed.  On all these issues, I am open to working with Congress to ensure that webuild a broad consensus for how to move forward, and I’m confident that we can shape anapproach that meets our security needs while upholding the civil liberties of every American.
Let me now turn to the separate set of concerns that have been raised overseas, and focus onAmerica’s approach to intelligence collection abroad.  As I’ve indicated, the United States hasunique responsibilities when it comes to intelligence collection.  Our capabilities help protectnot only our nation, but our friends and our allies, as well.  But our efforts will only beeffective if ordinary citizens in other countries have confidence that the United States respectstheir privacy, too.  And the leaders of our close friends and allies deserve to know that if Iwant to know what they think about an issue, I’ll pick up the phone and call them, rather thanturning to surveillance.  In other words, just as we balance security and privacy at home, ourglobal leadership demands that we balance our security requirements against our need tomaintain the trust and cooperation among people and leaders around the world.
  
For that reason, the new presidential directive that I’ve issued today will clearly prescribewhat we do, and do not do, when it comes to our overseas surveillance.  To begin with, thedirective makes clear that the United States only uses signals intelligence for legitimatenational security purposes, and not for the purpose of indiscriminately reviewing the emails orphone calls of ordinary folks.  I’ve also made it clear that the United States does not collectintelligence to suppress criticism or dissent, nor do we collect intelligence to disadvantagepeople on the basis of their ethnicity, or race, or gender, or sexual orientation, or religiousbeliefs.  We do not collect intelligence to provide a competitive advantage to U.S. companiesor U.S. commercial sectors.
And in terms of our bulk collection of signals intelligence, U.S. intelligence agencies will onlyuse such data to meet specific security requirements:  counterintelligence, counterterrorism,counter-proliferation, cybersecurity, force protection for our troops and our allies, andcombating transnational crime, including sanctions evasion.
In this directive, I have taken the unprecedented step of extending certain protections that wehave for the American people to people overseas.  I’ve directed the DNI, in consultation withthe Attorney General, to develop these safeguards, which will limit the duration that we canhold personal information, while also restricting the use of this information.
The bottom line is that people around the world, regardless of their nationality, should knowthat the United States is not spying on ordinary people who don’t threaten our nationalsecurity, and that we take their privacy concerns into account in our policies and procedures. This applies to foreign leaders as well.  Given the understandable attention that this issue hasreceived, I have made clear to the intelligence community that unless there is a compellingnational security purpose, we will not monitor the communications of heads of state andgovernment of our close friends and allies.  And I’ve instructed my national security team, aswell as the intelligence community, to work with foreign counterparts to deepen ourcoordination and cooperation in ways that rebuild trust going forward.
Now let me be clear:  Our intelligence agencies will continue to gather information about theintentions of governments -- as opposed to ordinary citizens -- around the world, in the sameway that the intelligence services of every other nation does.  We will not apologize simplybecause our services may be more effective.  But heads of state and government with whomwe work closely, and on whose cooperation we depend, should feel confident that we aretreating them as real partners.  And the changes I’ve ordered do just that.
Finally, to make sure that we follow through on all these reforms, I am making someimportant changes to how our government is organized.  The State Department will designatea senior officer to coordinate our diplomacy on issues related to technology and signalsintelligence.  We will appoint a senior official at the White House to implement the new privacysafeguards that I have announced today.  I will devote the resources to centralize andimprove the process we use to handle foreign requests for legal assistance, keeping our highstandards for privacy while helping foreign partners fight crime and terrorism.
  
I have also asked my counselor, John Podesta, to lead a comprehensive review of big dataand privacy.  And this group will consist of government officials who, along with thePresident’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, will reach out to privacy experts,technologists and business leaders, and look how the challenges inherent in big data are beingconfronted by both the public and private sectors; whether we can forge international normson how to manage this data; and how we can continue to promote the free flow of informationin ways that are consistent with both privacy and security.
For ultimately, what’s at stake in this debate goes far beyond a few months of headlines, orpassing tensions in our foreign policy.  When you cut through the noise, what’s really at stakeis how we remain true to who we are in a world that is remaking itself at dizzying speed. Whether it’s the ability of individuals to communicate ideas; to access information that wouldhave once filled every great library in every country in the world; or to forge bonds withpeople on other sides of the globe, technology is remaking what is possible for individuals,and for institutions, and for the international order.  So while the reforms that I haveannounced will point us in a new direction, I am mindful that more work will be needed in thefuture.
One thing I’m certain of:  This debate will make us stronger.  And I also know that in this timeof change, the United States of America will have to lead.  It may seem sometimes thatAmerica is being held to a different standard.  And I'll admit the readiness of some to assumethe worst motives by our government can be frustrating.  No one expects China to have anopen debate about their surveillance programs, or Russia to take privacy concerns of citizensin other places into account.  But let’s remember:  We are held to a different standardprecisely because we have been at the forefront of defending personal privacy and humandignity.
As the nation that developed the Internet, the world expects us to ensure that the digitalrevolution works as a tool for individual empowerment, not government control.  Having faceddown the dangers of totalitarianism and fascism and communism, the world expects us tostand up for the principle that every person has the right to think and write and formrelationships freely -- because individual freedom is the wellspring of human progress.
Those values make us who we are.  And because of the strength of our own democracy, weshould not shy away from high expectations.  For more than two centuries, our Constitutionhas weathered every type of change because we have been willing to defend it, and becausewe have been willing to question the actions that have been taken in its defense.  Today is nodifferent.  I believe we can meet high expectations.  Together, let us chart a way forward thatsecures the life of our nation while preserving the liberties that make our nation worth fightingfor.
Thank you.  God bless you.  May God bless the United States of America.
