Good evening.  Tonight, I want to talk about the debate we’ve been having in Washingtonover the national debt -- a debate that directly affects the lives of all Americans.
For the last decade, we’ve spent more money than we take in.  In the year 2000, thegovernment had a budget surplus.  But instead of using it to pay off our debt, the money wasspent on trillions of dollars in new tax cuts, while two wars and an expensive prescription drugprogram were simply added to our nation’s credit card.
As a result, the deficit was on track to top $1 trillion the year I took office.  To make mattersworse, the recession meant that there was less money coming in, and it required us to spendeven more -- on tax cuts for middle-class families to spur the economy; on unemploymentinsurance; on aid to states so we could prevent more teachers and firefighters and policeofficers from being laid off.  These emergency steps also added to the deficit.
Now, every family knows that a little credit card debt is manageable.  But if we stay on thecurrent path, our growing debt could cost us jobs and do serious damage to the economy. More of our tax dollars will go toward paying off the interest on our loans.  Businesses will beless likely to open up shop and hire workers in a country that can’t balance its books.  Interestrates could climb for everyone who borrows money -- the homeowner with a mortgage, thestudent with a college loan, the corner store that wants to expand.  And we won’t haveenough money to make job-creating investments in things like education and infrastructure,or pay for vital programs like Medicare and Medicaid.
  
Because neither party is blameless for the decisions that led to this problem, both partieshave a responsibility to solve it.  And over the last several months, that’s what we’ve beentrying to do.  I won’t bore you with the details of every plan or proposal, but basically, thedebate has centered around two different approaches.
The first approach says, let’s live within our means by making serious, historic cuts ingovernment spending.  Let’s cut domestic spending to the lowest level it’s been since DwightEisenhower was President.  Let’s cut defense spending at the Pentagon by hundreds of billionsof dollars.  Let’s cut out waste and fraud in health care programs like Medicare -- and at thesame time, let’s make modest adjustments so that Medicare is still there for futuregenerations.  Finally, let’s ask the wealthiest Americans and biggest corporations to give upsome of their breaks in the tax code and special deductions.
This balanced approach asks everyone to give a little without requiring anyone to sacrifice toomuch.  It would reduce the deficit by around $4 trillion and put us on a path to pay down ourdebt.  And the cuts wouldn’t happen so abruptly that they’d be a drag on our economy, orprevent us from helping small businesses and middle-class families get back on their feet rightnow.
This approach is also bipartisan.  While many in my own party aren’t happy with the painfulcuts it makes, enough will be willing to accept them if the burden is fairly shared.  WhileRepublicans might like to see deeper cuts and no revenue at all, there are many in the Senatewho have said, “Yes, I’m willing to put politics aside and consider this approach because I careabout solving the problem.”  And to his credit, this is the kind of approach the RepublicanSpeaker of the House, John Boehner, was working on with me over the last several weeks.
The only reason this balanced approach isn’t on its way to becoming law right now is becausea significant number of Republicans in Congress are insisting on a different approach -- a cuts-
only approach -- an approach that doesn’t ask the wealthiest Americans or biggestcorporations to contribute anything at all.  And because nothing is asked of those at the top ofthe income scale, such an approach would close the deficit only with more severe cuts toprograms we all care about -- cuts that place a greater burden on working families.
So the debate right now isn’t about whether we need to make tough choices.  Democrats andRepublicans agree on the amount of deficit reduction we need.  The debate is about how itshould be done.  Most Americans, regardless of political party, don’t understand how we canask a senior citizen to pay more for her Medicare before we ask a corporate jet owner or theoil companies to give up tax breaks that other companies don’t get.  How can we ask astudent to pay more for college before we ask hedge fund managers to stop paying taxes at alower rate than their secretaries?  How can we slash funding for education and clean energybefore we ask people like me to give up tax breaks we don’t need and didn’t ask for?  
  
That’s not right.  It’s not fair.  We all want a government that lives within its means, but thereare still things we need to pay for as a country -- things like new roads and bridges; weathersatellites and food inspection; services to veterans and medical research. 
And keep in mind that under a balanced approach, the 98 percent of Americans who makeunder $250,000 would see no tax increases at all.  None.  In fact, I want to extend the payrolltax cut for working families.  What we’re talking about under a balanced approach is askingAmericans whose incomes have gone up the most over the last decade -- millionaires andbillionaires -- to share in the sacrifice everyone else has to make.  And I think these patrioticAmericans are willing to pitch in.  In fact, over the last few decades, they’ve pitched in everytime we passed a bipartisan deal to reduce the deficit.  The first time a deal was passed, apredecessor of mine made the case for a balanced approach by saying this:
“Would you rather reduce deficits and interest rates by raising revenue from those whoare not now paying their fair share, or would you rather accept larger budget deficits,higher interest rates, and higher unemployment?  And I think I know your answer.”
Those words were spoken by Ronald Reagan.  But today, many Republicans in the Houserefuse to consider this kind of balanced approach -- an approach that was pursued not only byPresident Reagan, but by the first President Bush, by President Clinton, by myself, and bymany Democrats and Republicans in the United States Senate.  So we’re left with astalemate. 
Now, what makes today’s stalemate so dangerous is that it has been tied to something knownas the debt ceiling -- a term that most people outside of Washington have probably neverheard of before. 
Understand -- raising the debt ceiling does not allow Congress to spend more money.  Itsimply gives our country the ability to pay the bills that Congress has already racked up.  Inthe past, raising the debt ceiling was routine.  Since the 1950s, Congress has always passedit, and every President has signed it.  President Reagan did it 18 times.  George W. Bush did itseven times.  And we have to do it by next Tuesday, August 2nd, or else we won’t be able topay all of our bills.  
Unfortunately, for the past several weeks, Republican House members have essentially saidthat the only way they’ll vote to prevent America’s first-ever default is if the rest of us agreeto their deep, spending cuts-only approach.   
If that happens, and we default, we would not have enough money to pay all of our bills --bills that include monthly Social Security checks, veterans’ benefits, and the governmentcontracts we’ve signed with thousands of businesses. 
  
For the first time in history, our country’s AAA credit rating would be downgraded, leavinginvestors around the world to wonder whether the United States is still a good bet.  Interestrates would skyrocket on credit cards, on mortgages and on car loans, which amounts to ahuge tax hike on the American people.  We would risk sparking a deep economic crisis -- thisone caused almost entirely by Washington.
So defaulting on our obligations is a reckless and irresponsible outcome to this debate.  AndRepublican leaders say that they agree we must avoid default.  But the new approach thatSpeaker Boehner unveiled today, which would temporarily extend the debt ceiling in exchangefor spending cuts, would force us to once again face the threat of default just six months fromnow.  In other words, it doesn’t solve the problem.  
First of all, a six-month extension of the debt ceiling might not be enough to avoid a creditdowngrade and the higher interest rates that all Americans would have to pay as a result.  Weknow what we have to do to reduce our deficits; there’s no point in putting the economy atrisk by kicking the can further down the road.    
But there’s an even greater danger to this approach.  Based on what we’ve seen these pastfew weeks, we know what to expect six months from now.  The House of Representatives willonce again refuse to prevent default unless the rest of us accept their cuts-only approach. Again, they will refuse to ask the wealthiest Americans to give up their tax cuts ordeductions.  Again, they will demand harsh cuts to programs like Medicare.  And once again,the economy will be held captive unless they get their way. 
This is no way to run the greatest country on Earth.  It’s a dangerous game that we’ve neverplayed before, and we can’t afford to play it now.  Not when the jobs and livelihoods of somany families are at stake.  We can’t allow the American people to become collateral damageto Washington’s political warfare. 
Congress now has one week left to act, and there are still paths forward.  The Senate hasintroduced a plan to avoid default, which makes a down payment on deficit reduction andensures that we don’t have to go through this again in six months. 
I think that’s a much better approach, although serious deficit reduction would still require usto tackle the tough challenges of entitlement and tax reform.  Either way, I’ve told leaders ofboth parties that they must come up with a fair compromise in the next few days that canpass both houses of Congress -- and a compromise that I can sign.  I’m confident we canreach this compromise.  Despite our disagreements, Republican leaders and I have foundcommon ground before.  And I believe that enough members of both parties will ultimatelyput politics aside and help us make progress.
  
Now, I realize that a lot of the new members of Congress and I don’t see eye-to-eye on manyissues.  But we were each elected by some of the same Americans for some of the samereasons.  Yes, many want government to start living within its means.  And many are fed upwith a system in which the deck seems stacked against middle-class Americans in favor of thewealthiest few.  But do you know what people are fed up with most of all?
They’re fed up with a town where compromise has become a dirty word.  They work all daylong, many of them scraping by, just to put food on the table.  And when these Americanscome home at night, bone-tired, and turn on the news, all they see is the same partisanthree-ring circus here in Washington.  They see leaders who can’t seem to come together anddo what it takes to make life just a little bit better for ordinary Americans.  They’re offendedby that.  And they should be. 
The American people may have voted for divided government, but they didn’t vote for adysfunctional government.  So I’m asking you all to make your voice heard.  If you want abalanced approach to reducing the deficit, let your member of Congress know.  If you believewe can solve this problem through compromise, send that message.
America, after all, has always been a grand experiment in compromise.  As a democracy madeup of every race and religion, where every belief and point of view is welcomed, we have putto the test time and again the proposition at the heart of our founding:  that out of many, weare one.  We’ve engaged in fierce and passionate debates about the issues of the day, butfrom slavery to war, from civil liberties to questions of economic justice, we have tried to liveby the words that Jefferson once wrote:  “Every man cannot have his way in all things --without this mutual disposition, we are disjointed individuals, but not a society.” 
History is scattered with the stories of those who held fast to rigid ideologies and refused tolisten to those who disagreed.  But those are not the Americans we remember.  We rememberthe Americans who put country above self, and set personal grievances aside for the greatergood.  We remember the Americans who held this country together during its most difficulthours; who put aside pride and party to form a more perfect union.  
That’s who we remember.  That’s who we need to be right now.  The entire world is watching. So let’s seize this moment to show why the United States of America is still the greatestnation on Earth -- not just because we can still keep our word and meet our obligations, butbecause we can still come together as one nation. 
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.
