Hello, hello, hello! Thank you very much. Everybody, please have a seat. Thank you. Hello,Pittsburgh! It is good to be back. Thank you, Senator Casey, and Mayor Ravenstahl, CountyExecutive Dan Onorato, State Auditor Jack Wagner, and all of you for having me back here atCarnegie Mellon. It is good to be here.
And it seems like every time I'm here I learn something. So, for those of you who are thinkingabout Carnegie Mellon, it's a terrific place, and you guys are doing just great work.
I just met with folks from some cutting-edge companies and saw some of their inventionshere in your National Robotics Engineering Center. But that’s not the only reason I’m here.You might not know this, but one of my responsibilities as Commander-in-Chief is to keep aneye on robots. And I’m pleased to report that the robots you manufacture here seem peaceful-- at least for now.
This is a city that knows something about manufacturing. For generations of Americans, it wasthe ticket to a middle-class life. Here and across America's industrial heartland, millionsclocked in each day at foundries and on assembly lines to make things. And the stuff we made-- steel, cars, planes -- was the stuff that made America what it is. The jobs were good. Theypaid enough to own a home, to raise kids, send them to college, to retire. They were jobs thattold us something more important than just how much money we made, what was in ourpaycheck. These jobs also told us that we were meeting our responsibilities to our family andto our neighborhoods, and building our communities, and building our country.
  
But for better and worse, our generation has been pounded by wave after wave of profoundeconomic change. Revolutions in technology have transformed the way we live and the waywe work. Businesses and industries can relocate anywhere in the world, anywhere that thereare skilled workers, anywhere that there is an Internet connection. And companies havelearned to become more efficient with fewer employees. In Pittsburgh, you know this as wellas anybody -- steel mills that once needed a thousand workers now do the same work with ahundred.
And while these changes have resulted in great wealth for some Americans and havedrastically increased productivity, they’ve also caused major disruptions for many others.Today, a high school diploma no longer guarantees you a job. Over the past 13 years, about athird of our manufacturing jobs have vanished. And meanwhile, the typical worker’s wageshave barely kept up with the rising costs of everything else. And all this was even before afinancial crisis and recession that pounded the middle class even more.
Now, we’ve made some tough decisions that have turned our economy in a positive directionover the past two years. We’ve created more than 2 million new jobs in the private sectorover the past 15 months alone, including almost 250,000 in manufacturing. But we still haveto confront those underlying problems. They weren’t caused overnight, and we won’t solvethem overnight. But we will solve them. And we’re starting to solve them right here inPittsburgh, and right here at Carnegie Mellon.
And by the way, that’s why I ran for President. Not just to get us back to where we were -- Iran for President to get us to where we need to be. I have a larger vision for America -- onewhere working families feel secure, feel like they are moving forward and that they know thattheir dreams are within reach; an America where our businesses lead the world in newtechnologies like clean energy; where we work together, Democrats and Republicans, to livewithin our means, to cut our deficit and debt, but also to invest in what our economy needs togrow -- world-class education, cutting-edge research, and building the best transportation andcommunication infrastructure anywhere in the world. That’s what it’s going to take for us towin the future. And winning the future begins with getting our economy moving right now.
And that’s why we’re here. Carnegie Mellon is a great example of what it means to moveforward. At its founding, no one would have imagined that a trade school for the sons anddaughters of steelworkers would one day become the region’s largest -- one of the region’slargest employers and a global research university. And yet, innovations led by yourprofessors and your students have created more than 300 companies and 9,000 jobs over thepast 15 years -- companies like Carnegie Robotics.
But more important than the ideas that you’ve incubated are what those ideas have become:They’ve become products made right here in America and, in many cases, sold all over theworld. And that's in our blood. That's who we are. We are inventors, and we are makers, andwe are doers.
  
If we want a robust, growing economy, we need a robust, growing manufacturing sector.That’s why we told the auto industry two years ago that if they were willing to adapt, we’dstand by them. Today, they’re profitable, they’re creating jobs, and they’re repayingtaxpayers ahead of schedule.
That's why we’ve launched a partnership to retrain workers with new skills. That’s why we’veinvested in clean energy manufacturing and new jobs building wind turbines and solar panelsand advanced batteries. We have not run out of stuff to make. We’ve just got to reinvigorateour manufacturing sector so that it leads the world the way it always has -- from paper andsteel and cars to new products that we haven’t even dreamed up yet. That’s how we’re goingto strengthen existing industries; that's how we’re going to spark new ones. That’s how we’regoing to create jobs, grow the middle class, and secure our economic leadership.
And this is why I asked my Council of Advisors on Science and Technology -- what we callPCAST -- a while back to look at the state of American manufacturing and the promise ofadvanced manufacturing. The concept of advanced manufacturing is not complicated. Itmeans how do we do things better, faster, cheaper to design and manufacture superiorproducts that allow us to compete all over the world.
And so these very smart folks, many of whom are represented here, wrote up a report whichis now up on the White House website. But we didn't want to just issue a report, we wanted toactually get something done. So we’ve launched an all-hands-on-deck effort between ourbrightest academic minds, some of our boldest business leaders, and our most dedicatedpublic servants from science and technology agencies, all with one big goal, and that is arenaissance of American manufacturing.
We’re calling it AMP, A-M-P -- the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership. It’s made up of someof the most advanced engineering universities, like Carnegie Mellon, Georgia Tech, Stanford,Berkeley, Michigan; some of our most innovative manufacturers, from Johnson & Johnson toHoneywell, Stryker to Allegheny Technologies. I’ve asked Susan Hockfield, the President ofMIT, who is here -- there’s Susan -- and Andrew Liveris, the CEO of Dow Chemical -- to leadthis partnership, and to work with my own advisors on science, technology andmanufacturing.
Throughout our history, our greatest breakthroughs have often come from partnerships justlike this one. American innovation has always been sparked by individual scientists andentrepreneurs, often at universities like Carnegie Mellon or Georgia Tech or Berkeley orStanford. But a lot of companies don’t invest in early ideas because it won’t pay off rightaway. And that’s where government can step in. That’s how we ended up with some of theworld-changing innovations that fueled our growth and prosperity and created countless jobs -
- the mobile phone, the Internet, GPS, more than 150 drugs and vaccines over the last 40years was all because we were able to, in strategic ways, bring people together and makesome critical investments.
  
I’ll take one example. The National Science Foundation helped fund Stanford’s Digital LibraryProject in the 1990s. The idea was to develop a universal digital library that anybody couldaccess. So two enterprising Ph.D. students got excited about the research that was beingdone at Stanford -- this is funded by NSF. So these two Ph.D. students, they moved fromcampus to a friend’s garage, and they launched this company called Google. And when theprivate sector runs with the ball, it then leads to jobs, building and selling, that is successfulall over the world. 
This new partnership that we’ve created will make sure tomorrow’s breakthroughs areAmerican breakthroughs. We’re teaming up to foster the kind of collaborative R&D thatresulted in those same early discoveries, and to create the kind of innovation infrastructurenecessary to get ideas from the drawing board to the manufacturing floor to the market morerapidly -- all of which will make our businesses more competitive and create new, high-qualitymanufacturing jobs.
Now, to help businesses operate at less cost, the Energy Department will develop newmanufacturing processes and materials that use half as much energy. That will free up moremoney for companies to hire new workers or buy new equipment.
To help businesses discover, develop, and deploy new materials twice as fast, we’re launchingwhat we call the Materials Genome Initiative. The invention of silicon circuits and lithium-ionbatteries made computers and iPods and iPads possible -- but it took years to get thosetechnologies from the drawing board to the marketplace. We can do it faster.
To help everyone from factory workers to astronauts carry out more complicated tasks, NASAand other agencies will support research into next-generation robotics. And I just met withfolks from a local company, RedZone Robotics, who make robots that explore water and sewerpipes. And I have to say, it is fascinating stuff, when you watch -- the robot is about this big.It can go through any sewer system. It’s operated remotely by the municipal worker. It’s gota camera attached so it can film everything that it’s seeing. It then transmits the data. It goesinto a citywide database, and can enhance the productivity of these workers by three orfourfold, and help the city make even better decisions. Potentially this can save cities millionsin infrastructure costs. Companies also are training new workers to operate the robots, andanalysts to pore through the data that’s being collected.
To help smaller manufacturers compete, federal agencies are working with private companiesto make powerful, often unaffordable modeling and simulation software easier to access. AndI just saw an example. A few years ago, Procter & Gamble teamed up with the researchers atLos Alamos National Labs to adapt software developed for war to figure out what’s happeningwith nuclear particles, and they are using these simulators to dramatically boost theperformance of diapers. Yes, diapers. Folks chuckle, but those who’ve been parents -- arealways on the lookout for indestructible, military-grade diapers.
  
But here’s what’s remarkable: Using this simulation software that was developed at LosAlamos, Procter & Gamble has saved 500 million dollars -- half a billion dollars -- as aconsequence of this simulator. Now, through the new partnership that we’re setting up,Procter & Gamble is offering its powerful fluid dynamics simulator to smaller manufacturers,and it’s doing it for free. 
Now, this is not just because Procter & Gamble wants to do good. It’s also they’ve gotthousands of suppliers, and they're thinking to themselves, if we can apply this simulationtechnology to our smaller suppliers they're going to be able to make their products cheaperand better, then that, in turn, is going to save us even more money. And it has a ripple effectthroughout the economy.
Starting this summer, federal agencies will partner with industries to boost manufacturing inareas critical to our national security. I just saw an example backstage. The DefenseDepartment scientists -- we call it DARPA -- the folks who brought us stealth technology and,by the way, who brought us the Internet -- wanted to see if it was possible to design defensesystems cheaper and faster. So they found a small company in Arizona called Local Motors,and they gave them a test: You have one month to design a new combat support vehicle, andyou’ve got three months to build it.
Their CEO, Jay Rogers, is here today, and as an ex-Marine who lost a couple of buddies incombat, understood the importance of increasing the speed and adaptability and flexibility ofour manufacturing process for vehicles that are used in theater.
So Local Motors solicited design ideas on their website, chose the best out of 162 that itreceived, built and brought this new vehicle here ahead of schedule. We just took a look at it.Not only could this change the way the government uses your tax dollars -- because thinkabout it, instead of having a 10-year lead time to develop a piece of equipment with all kindsof changing specs and a moving target, if we were able to collapse the pace at which thatmanufacturing takes place, that could save taxpayers billions of dollars. But it also could getproducts out to theater faster, which could save lives more quickly, and could then be used totransfer into the private sector more rapidly, which means we could get better products andservices that we can sell and export around the world. So it’s good for American companies.It’s good for American jobs. It’s good for taxpayers. And it may save some lives in places likeAfghanistan for our soldiers.
So that’s what this is all about. As futuristic and, let’s face it, as cool as some of this stuff is,as much as we are planning for America’s future, this partnership is about new, cutting-edgeideas to create new jobs, spark new breakthroughs, reinvigorate American manufacturingtoday. Right now. Not somewhere off in the future -- right now. 
  
It’s about making sure our workers and businesses have the skills and the tools they need tocompete better, faster, and smarter than anybody else. That's what we’re about. We areAmerica, and we don’t just keep up with changing times, we set the pace for changing times.We adapt; we innovate; we lead the way forward.
It’s worth remembering, there was a time when steel was about as advanced asmanufacturing got. But when the namesake of this university, Andrew Carnegie -- animmigrant, by the way -- discovered new ways to mass-produce steel cheaply, everythingchanged. Just 20 years after founding his company, not only was it the largest, mostprofitable in the world, America had become the number one steelmaker in the world. 
Now, imagine if America was first to develop and mass-produce a new treatment that killscancer cells but leaves healthy ones untouched; or solar cells you can brush onto a house forthe same cost as paint; or flexible display soldiers -- flexible displays that soldiers can wear ontheir arms; or a car that drives itself. Imagine how many workers and businesses andconsumers would prosper from those breakthroughs. 
Those things aren’t science fiction -- they’re real. They’re being developed and deployed inlabs and factories and on test tracks right now. They sprang from the imagination of studentsand scientists and entrepreneurs like all of you. And the purpose of this partnership is toprove that the United States of America has your back, is going to be supporting you --because that’s the kind of adventurous, pioneering spirit that we need right now.
That’s the spirit that’s given us the tools and toughness to overcome every obstacle and adaptto every circumstance. And if we remember that spirit, if we combine our creativity, ourinnovation, and our optimism, if we come together in common cause, as we've done so manytimes before, then we will thrive again. We will get to where we need to be. And we will makethis century the American century just like the last one was. 
Thank you very much, everybody.
God bless you.
And God bless the United States of America.
