Thank you.  Everyone please have a seat.  Thank you very much.  Let -- Let me thank PastorHybels from near my hometown in Chicago, who took time off his vacation to be here today. We are blessed to have him.
I want to thank President Neil Kerwin and our hosts here at American University; acknowledgemy outstanding Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis, and members of my administration; all themembers of Congress -- Hilda deserves applause.  To all the members of Congress, theelected officials, faith and law enforcement, labor, business leaders and immigrationadvocates who are here today -- thank you for your presence.
I want to thank American University for welcoming me to the campus once again.  Some mayrecall that the last time I was here I was joined by a dear friend, and a giant of Americanpolitics, Senator Edward Kennedy.  Teddy’s not here right now, but his legacy of civil rightsand health care and worker protections is still with us.
I was a candidate for President that day, and some may recall I argued that our country hadreached a tipping point; that after years in which we had deferred our most pressingproblems, and too often yielded to the politics of the moment, we now faced a choice:  Wecould squarely confront our challenges with honesty and determination, or we could consignourselves and our children to a future less prosperous and less secure. 
  
I believed that then and I believe it now.  And that’s why, even as we’ve tackled the mostsevere economic crisis since the Great Depression, even as we’ve wound down the war in Iraqand refocused our efforts in Afghanistan, my administration has refused to ignore some of thefundamental challenges facing this generation.
We launched the most aggressive education reforms in decades, so that our children can gainthe knowledge and skills they need to compete in a 21st century global economy.
We have finally delivered on the promise of health reform -- reform that will bring greatersecurity to every American, and that will rein in the skyrocketing costs that threaten families,businesses and the prosperity of our nation.
We’re on the verge of reforming an outdated and ineffective set of rules governing Wall Street-- to give greater power to consumers and prevent the reckless financial speculation that ledto this severe recession.
And we’re accelerating the transition to a clean energy economy by significantly raising thefuel-efficiency standards of cars and trucks, and by doubling our use of renewable energieslike wind and solar power -- steps that have the potential to create whole new industries andhundreds of thousands of new jobs in America. 
So, despite the forces of the status quo, despite the polarization and the frequent pettiness ofour politics, we are confronting the great challenges of our times.  And while this work isn’teasy, and the changes we seek won’t always happen overnight, what we’ve made clear is thatthis administration will not just kick the can down the road. 
Immigration reform is no exception.  In recent days, the issue of immigration has becomeonce more a source of fresh contention in our country, with the passage of a controversial lawin Arizona and the heated reactions we’ve seen across America.  Some have rallied behind thisnew policy.  Others have protested and launched boycotts of the state.  And everywhere,people have expressed frustration with a system that seems fundamentally broken. 
Of course, the tensions around immigration are not new.  On the one hand, we’ve alwaysdefined ourselves as a nation of immigrants -- a nation that welcomes those willing toembrace America’s precepts.  Indeed, it is this constant flow of immigrants that helped tomake America what it is.  The scientific breakthroughs of Albert Einstein, the inventions ofNikola Tesla, the great ventures of Andrew Carnegie’s U.S. Steel and Sergey Brin’s Google,Inc. -- all this was possible because of immigrants.
And then there are the countless names and the quiet acts that never made the history booksbut were no less consequential in building this country -- the generations who braved hardshipand great risk to reach our shores in search of a better life for themselves and their families;
  
the millions of people, ancestors to most of us, who believed that there was a place wherethey could be, at long last, free to work and worship and live their lives in peace. 
So this steady stream of hardworking and talented people has made America the engine ofthe global economy and a beacon of hope around the world.  And it’s allowed us to adapt andthrive in the face of technological and societal change.  To this day, America reaps incredibleeconomic rewards because we remain a magnet for the best and brightest from across theglobe.  Folks travel here in the hopes of being a part of a culture of entrepreneurship andingenuity, and by doing so they strengthen and enrich that culture.  Immigration also meanswe have a younger workforce -- and a faster-growing economy -- than many of ourcompetitors.  And in an increasingly interconnected world, the diversity of our country is apowerful advantage in global competition. 
Just a few weeks ago, we had an event of small business owners at the White House.  Andone business owner was a woman named Prachee Devadas who came to this country, becamea citizen, and opened up a successful technology services company.  When she started, shehad just one employee.  Today, she employs more than a hundred people.  This past April, weheld a naturalization ceremony at the White House for members of our armed forces.  Eventhough they were not yet citizens, they had enlisted.  One of them was a woman named PerlaRamos -- born and raised in Mexico, came to the United States shortly after 9/11, and sheeventually joined the Navy.  And she said, “I take pride in our flag and the history that forgedthis great nation and the history we write day by day.”
These women, and men and women across this country like them, remind us that immigrantshave always helped to build and defend this country -- and that being an American is not amatter of blood or birth.  It’s a matter of faith.  It’s a matter of fidelity to the shared valuesthat we all hold so dear.  That’s what makes us unique.  That’s what makes us strong. Anybody can help us write the next great chapter in our history. 
Now, we can’t forget that this process of immigration and eventual inclusion has often beenpainful.  Each new wave of immigrants has generated fear and resentments towardsnewcomers, particularly in times of economic upheaval.  Our founding was rooted in thenotion that America was unique as a place of refuge and freedom for, in Thomas Jefferson’swords, “oppressed humanity.”  But the ink on our Constitution was barely dry when, amidstconflict, Congress passed the Alien and Sedition Acts, which placed harsh restrictions of thosesuspected of having foreign allegiances.  A century ago, immigrants from Ireland, Italy,Poland, other European countries were routinely subjected to rank discrimination and uglystereotypes.  Chinese immigrants were held in detention and deported from Angel Island inthe San Francisco Bay.  They didn’t even get to come in.
So the politics of who is and who is not allowed to enter this country, and on what terms, hasalways been contentious.  And that remains true today.  And it’s made worse by a failure ofthose of us in Washington to fix a broken immigration system. 
  
To begin with, our borders have been porous for decades.  Obviously, the problem is greatestalong our Southern border, but it’s not restricted to that part of the country.  In fact, becausewe don’t do a very good job of tracking who comes in and out of the country as visitors, largenumbers avoid immigration laws simply by overstaying their visas.
The result is an estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants in the United States.  Theoverwhelming majority of these men and women are simply seeking a better life forthemselves and their children.  Many settle in low-wage sectors of the economy; they workhard, they save, they stay out of trouble.  But because they live in the shadows, they’revulnerable to unscrupulous businesses who pay them less than the minimum wage or violateworker safety rules -- thereby putting companies who follow those rules, and Americans whorightly demand the minimum wage or overtime, at an unfair [dis]advantage.  Crimes gounreported as victims and witnesses fear coming forward.  And this makes it harder for thepolice to catch violent criminals and keep neighborhoods safe.  And billions in tax revenue arelost each year because many undocumented workers are paid under the table.
More fundamentally, the presence of so many illegal immigrants makes a mockery of all thosewho are going through the process of immigrating legally.  Indeed, after years of patchworkfixes and ill-conceived revisions, the legal immigration system is as broken as the borders. Backlogs and bureaucracy means the process can take years.  While an applicant waits forapproval, he or she is often forbidden from visiting the United States -- which means evenhusbands and wives may be forced to spend many years apart.  High fees and the need forlawyers may exclude worthy applicants.  And while we provide students from around theworld visas to get engineering and computer science degrees at our top universities, our lawsdiscourage them from using those skills to start a business or power a new industry right herein the United States.  Instead of training entrepreneurs to create jobs on our shores, we trainour competition.
In sum, the system is broken.  And everybody knows it.  Unfortunately, reform has been heldhostage to political posturing and special-interest wrangling -- and to the pervasive sentimentin Washington that tackling such a thorny and emotional issue is inherently bad politics. 
Just a few years ago, when I was a senator, we forged a bipartisan coalition in favor ofcomprehensive reform.  Under the leadership of Senator Kennedy, who had been a longtimechampion of immigration reform, and Senator John McCain, we worked across the aisle tohelp pass a bipartisan bill through the Senate.  But that effort eventually came apart.  Andnow, under the pressures of partisanship and election-year politics, many of the 11 Republicansenators who voted for reform in the past have now backed away from their previoussupport. 
Into this breach, states like Arizona have decided to take matters into their own hands.  Giventhe levels of frustration across the country, this is understandable.  But it is also ill conceived.  
  
And it’s not just that the law Arizona passed is divisive -- although it has fanned the flames ofan already contentious debate.  Laws like Arizona’s put huge pressures on local lawenforcement to enforce rules that ultimately are unenforceable.  It puts pressure on alreadyhard-strapped state and local budgets.  It makes it difficult for people here illegally to reportcrimes -- driving a wedge between communities and law enforcement, making our streetsmore dangerous and the jobs of our police officers more difficult. 
And you don’t have to take my word for this.  You can speak to the police chiefs and othersfrom law enforcement here today who will tell you the same thing. 
These laws also have the potential of violating the rights of innocent American citizens andlegal residents, making them subject to possible stops or questioning because of what theylook like or how they sound.  And as other states and localities go their own ways, we face theprospect that different rules for immigration will apply in different parts of the country -- apatchwork of local immigration rules where we all know one clear national standard isneeded. 
Our task then is to make our national laws actually work -- to shape a system that reflects ourvalues as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.  And that means being honest aboutthe problem, and getting past the false debates that divide the country rather than bring ittogether.
For example, there are those in the immigrants’ rights community who have arguedpassionately that we should simply provide those who are [here] illegally with legal status, orat least ignore the laws on the books and put an end to deportation until we have betterlaws.  And often this argument is framed in moral terms:  Why should we punish people whoare just trying to earn a living? 
I recognize the sense of compassion that drives this argument, but I believe such anindiscriminate approach would be both unwise and unfair.  It would suggest to those thinkingabout coming here illegally that there will be no repercussions for such a decision.  And thiscould lead to a surge in more illegal immigration.  And it would also ignore the millions ofpeople around the world who are waiting in line to come here legally. 
Ultimately, our nation, like all nations, has the right and obligation to control its borders andset laws for residency and citizenship.  And no matter how decent they are, no matter theirreasons, the 11 million who broke these laws should be held accountable.
Now, if the majority of Americans are skeptical of a blanket amnesty, they are also skepticalthat it is possible to round up and deport 11 million people.  They know it’s not possible.  Suchan effort would be logistically impossible and wildly expensive.  Moreover, it would tear at thevery fabric of this nation -- because immigrants who are here illegally are now intricatelywoven into that fabric.
  
Many have children who are American citizens.  Some are children themselves, brought hereby their parents at a very young age, growing up as American kids, only to discover theirillegal status when they apply for college or a job.  Migrant workers -- mostly here illegally --have been the labor force of our farmers and agricultural producers for generations.  So evenif it was possible, a program of mass deportations would disrupt our economy andcommunities in ways that most Americans would find intolerable. 
Now, once we get past the two poles of this debate, it becomes possible to shape a practical,common-sense approach that reflects our heritage and our values.  Such an approachdemands accountability from everybody -- from government, from businesses and fromindividuals. 
Government has a threshold responsibility to secure our borders.  That’s why I directed mySecretary of Homeland Security, Janet Napolitano -- a former border governor -- to improveour enforcement policy without having to wait for a new law. 
Today, we have more boots on the ground near the Southwest border than at any time in ourhistory.  Let me repeat that:  We have more boots on the ground on the Southwest borderthan at any time in our history.  We doubled the personnel assigned to Border EnforcementSecurity Task Forces.  We tripled the number of intelligence analysts along the border.  Forthe first time, we’ve begun screening 100 percent of southbound rail shipments.  And as aresult, we’re seizing more illegal guns, cash and drugs than in years past.  Contrary to someof the reports that you see, crime along the border is down.  And statistics collected byCustoms and Border Protection reflect a significant reduction in the number of people trying tocross the border illegally. 
So the bottom line is this:  The southern border is more secure today than at any time in thepast 20 years.  That doesn’t mean we don’t have more work to do.  We have to do that work,but it’s important that we acknowledge the facts.  Even as we are committed to doing what’snecessary to secure our borders, even without passage of the new law, there are those whoargue that we should not move forward with any other elements of reform until we have fullysealed our borders.  But our borders are just too vast for us to be able to solve the problemonly with fences and border patrols.  It won’t work.  Our borders will not be secure as long asour limited resources are devoted to not only stopping gangs and potential terrorists, but alsothe hundreds of thousands who attempt to cross each year simply to find work.   That’s why businesses must be held accountable if they break the law by deliberately hiringand exploiting undocumented workers.  We’ve already begun to step up enforcement againstthe worst workplace offenders.  And we’re implementing and improving a system to giveemployers a reliable way to verify that their employees are here legally.  But we need to domore.  We cannot continue just to look the other way as a significant portion of our economyoperates outside the law.  It breeds abuse and bad practices.  It punishes employers who actresponsibly and undercuts American workers.
  
And ultimately, if the demand for undocumented workers falls, the incentive for people tocome here illegally will decline as well.   
Finally, we have to demand responsibility from people living here illegally.  They must berequired to admit that they broke the law.  They should be required to register, pay theirtaxes, pay a fine, and learn English.  They must get right with the law before they can get inline and earn their citizenship -- not just because it is fair, not just because it will make clearto those who might wish to come to America they must do so inside the bounds of the law,but because this is how we demonstrate that being -- what being an American means.  Beinga citizen of this country comes not only with rights but also with certain fundamentalresponsibilities.  We can create a pathway for legal status that is fair, reflective of our values,and works.
Now, stopping illegal immigration must go hand in hand with reforming our creaky system oflegal immigration.  We’ve begun to do that, by eliminating a backlog in background checksthat at one point stretched back almost a year.  That’s just for the background check.  Peoplecan now track the status of their immigration applications by email or text message.  We’veimproved accountability and safety in the detention system.  And we’ve stemmed theincreases in naturalization fees.  But here, too, we need to do more.  We should make iteasier for the best and the brightest to come to start businesses and develop products andcreate jobs. 
Our laws should respect families following the rules -- instead of splitting them apart.  Weneed to provide farms a legal way to hire the workers they rely on, and a path for thoseworkers to earn legal status.  And we should stop punishing innocent young people for theactions of their parents by denying them the chance to stay here and earn an education andcontribute their talents to build the country where they’ve grown up.  The DREAM Act woulddo this, and that’s why I supported this bill as a state legislator and as a U.S. senator -- andwhy I continue to support it as president.                           So these are the essential elements of comprehensive immigration reform.  The question nowis whether we will have the courage and the political will to pass a bill through Congress, tofinally get it done.  Last summer, I held a meeting with leaders of both parties, includingmany of the Republicans who had supported reform in the past -- and some who hadn’t.  Iwas pleased to see a bipartisan framework proposed in the Senate by Senators LindseyGraham and Chuck Schumer, with whom I met to discuss this issue.  I’ve spoken with theCongressional Hispanic Caucus to plot the way forward and meet -- and then I met with themearlier this week. 
And I’ve spoken with representatives from a growing coalition of labor unions and businessgroups, immigrant advocates and community organizations, law enforcement, localgovernment -- all who recognize the importance of immigration reform.
  
And I’ve met with leaders from America’s religious communities, like Pastor Hybels -- peopleof different faiths and beliefs, some liberal, some conservative, who nonetheless share a senseof urgency; who understand that fixing our broken immigration system is not only a politicalissue, not just an economic issue, but a moral imperative as well. 
So we’ve made progress.  I’m ready to move forward; the majority of Democrats are ready tomove forward; and I believe the majority of Americans are ready to move forward.  But thefact is, without bipartisan support, as we had just a few years ago, we cannot solve thisproblem.  Reform that brings accountability to our immigration system cannot pass withoutRepublican votes.  That is the political and mathematical reality.  The only way to reduce therisk that this effort will again falter because of politics is if members of both parties are willingto take responsibility for solving this problem once and for all. 
And, yes, this is an emotional question, and one that lends itself to demagoguery.  Time andagain, this issue has been used to divide and inflame -- and to demonize people.  And so theunderstandable, the natural impulse among those who run for office is to turn away and deferthis question for another day, or another year, or another administration.  Despite thecourageous leadership in the past shown by many Democrats and some Republicans --including, by the way, my predecessor, President Bush -- this has been the custom.  That iswhy a broken and dangerous system that offends our most basic American values is still inplace.
But I believe we can put politics aside and finally have an immigration system that’saccountable.  I believe we can appeal not to people’s fears but to their hopes, to their highestideals, because that’s who we are as Americans.  It’s been inscribed on our nation’s seal sincewe declared our independence.  “E pluribus unum.”  Out of many, one.  That is what hasdrawn the persecuted and impoverished to our shores.  That’s what led the innovators andrisk-takers from around the world to take a chance here in the land of opportunity.  That’swhat has led people to endure untold hardships to reach this place called America. 
 One of the largest waves of immigration in our history took place little more than a centuryago.  At the time, Jewish people were being driven out of Eastern Europe, often escaping tothe sounds of gunfire and the light from their villages burning to the ground.  The journeycould take months, as families crossed rivers in the dead of night, traveled miles by foot,endured a rough and dangerous passage over the North Atlantic.  Once here, many madetheir homes in a teeming and bustling Lower Manhattan. 
It was at this time that a young woman named Emma Lazarus, whose own family fledpersecution from Europe generations earlier, took up the cause of these new immigrants. Although she was a poet, she spent much of her time advocating for better health care andhousing for the newcomers.  And inspired by what she saw and heard, she wrote down herthoughts and donated a piece of work to help pay for the construction of a new statue -- theStatue of Liberty -- which actually was funded in part by small donations from people acrossAmerica. 
  
Years before the statue was built -- years before it would be seen by throngs of immigrantscraning their necks skyward at the end of long and brutal voyage, years before it would cometo symbolize everything that we cherish -- she imagined what it could mean.  She imaginedthe sight of a giant statue at the entry point of a great nation -- but unlike the greatmonuments of the past, this would not signal an empire.  Instead, it would signal one’s arrivalto a place of opportunity and refuge and freedom. 
“Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand,” she wrote,
A mighty woman with a torch…From her beacon-handGlows world-wide welcome…“Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!”…“Give me your tired, and your poor,Your huddled masses yearning to be free…Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me,I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”
Let us remember these words.  For it falls on each generation to ensure that that lamp -- thatbeacon -- continues to shine as a source of hope around the world, and a source of ourprosperity here at home. 
Thank you.  God bless you.  And may God bless the United States of America.  Thank you.
