Well, good afternoon everybody. 
Gina, I want to thank you not just for the introduction, but for the incredible work that youand your team have been doing -- not just on this issue, but on generally making sure thatwe've got clean air, clean water, a great future for our kids.
I want to thank all the members of Congress who are here, as well, who have been fightingthis issue, and sometimes at great odds with others, but are willing to take on what is goingto be one of the key challenges of our lifetimes and future generations.  I want to thank ourSurgeon General, who’s just been doing outstanding work and is helping to make theconnection between this critical issue and the health of our families.
Over the past six and a half years, we've taken on some of the toughest challenges of ourtime -- from rebuilding our economy after a devastating recession, to ending our wars in Iraqand Afghanistan and bringing almost all of our troops home, to strengthening our securitythrough tough and principled diplomacy.  But I am convinced that no challenge poses agreater threat to our future and future generations than a changing climate.  And that's whatbrings us here today.
  
Now, not everyone here is a scientist -- but some of you are among the best scientists in theworld.  And what you and your colleagues have been showing us for years now is that humanactivities are changing the climate in dangerous ways. Levels of carbon dioxide, which heatsup our atmosphere, are higher than they’ve been in 800,000 years; 2014 was the planet’swarmest year on record.  And we've been setting a lot of records in terms of warmest yearsover the last decade.  One year doesn’t make a trend, but 14 of the 15 warmest years onrecord have fallen within the first 15 years of this century.
Climate change is no longer just about the future that we're predicting for our children or ourgrandchildren; it's about the reality that we're living with every day, right now.
The Pentagon says that climate change poses immediate risks to our national security.  Whilewe can't say any single weather event is entirely caused by climate change, we've seenstronger storms, deeper droughts, longer wildfire seasons.  Charleston and Miami now flood athigh tide.  Shrinking ice caps forced National Geographic to make the biggest change in itsatlas since the Soviet Union broke apart.
Over the past three decades, nationwide asthma rates have more than doubled, and climatechange puts those Americans at greater risk of landing in the hospital.  As one of America’sgovernors has said, “We're the first generation to feel the impact of climate change and thelast generation that can do something about it.”
And that's why I committed the United States to leading the world on this challenge, becauseI believe there is such a thing as being too late.
Most of the issues that I deal with -- and I deal with some tough issues that cross my desk --by definition, I don't deal with issues if they’re easy to solve because somebody else hasalready solved them.  And some of them are grim.  Some of them are heartbreaking.  Someof them are hard.  Some of them are frustrating.  But most of the time, the issues we dealwith are ones that are temporally bound and we can anticipate things getting better if we justkind of plug away at it, even incrementally.  But this is one of those rare issues -- because ofits magnitude, because of its scope -- that if we don't get it right we may not be able toreverse, and we may not be able to adapt sufficiently. There is such a thing as being too latewhen it comes to climate change.
Now, that shouldn’t make us hopeless; it's not as if there’s nothing we can do about it.  Wecan take action.  Over the past several years, America has been working to use less dirtyenergy, more clean energy, waste less energy throughout our economy.  We've set new fueleconomy standards that mean our cars will go twice as far on a gallon of gas by the middle ofthe next decade. Combined with lower gas prices, these standards are on pace to save driversan average of $700 at the pump this year.  We doubled down on our investment in renewableenergy.  We're generating three times as much wind power, 20 times as much solar power aswe did in 2008.
  
These steps are making a difference.  Over the past decade, even as our economy hascontinued to grow, the United States has cut our total carbon pollution more than any othernation on Earth.  That's the good news.  But I am here to say that if we want to protect oureconomy and our security and our children’s health, we're going to have to do more.  Thescience tells us we have to do more.
This has been our focus these past six years.  And it's particularly going to be our focus thismonth.  In Nevada, later in August, I'll talk about the extraordinary progress we've made ingenerating clean energy -- and the jobs that come with it -- and how we can boost that evenfurther.  I'll also be the first American President to visit the Alaskan Arctic, where our fellowAmericans have already seen their communities devastated by melting ice and rising oceans,the impact on marine life.  We're going to talk about what the world needs to do together toprevent the worst impacts of climate change before it's too late.
And today, we're here to announce America’s Clean Power Plan -- a plan two years in themaking, and the single most important step America has ever taken in the fight against globalclimate change.
Right now, our power plants are the source of about a third of America’s carbon pollution.That's more pollution than our cars, our airplanes and our homes generate combined.  Thatpollution contributes to climate change, which degrades the air our kids breathe.  But therehave never been federal limits on the amount of carbon that power plants can dump into theair.  Think about that.  We limit the amount of toxic chemicals like mercury and sulfur andarsenic in our air or our water -- and we're better off for it.  But existing power plants can stilldump unlimited amounts of harmful carbon pollution into the air.
For the sake of our kids and the health and safety of all Americans, that has to change.  Forthe sake of the planet, that has to change.
So, two years ago, I directed Gina and the Environmental Protection Agency to take on thischallenge.  And today, after working with states and cities and power companies, the EPA issetting the first-ever nationwide standards to end the limitless dumping of carbon pollutionfrom power plants.
Here’s how it works.  Over the next few years, each state will have the change to put togetherits own plan for reducing emissions -- because every state has a different energy mix.  Somegenerate more of their power from renewables; some from natural gas, or nuclear, or coal.And this plan reflects the fact that not everybody is starting in the same place.  So we'regiving states the time and the flexibility they need to cut pollution in a way that works forthem.
And we'll reward the states that take action sooner instead of later -- because time is not onour side here.  As states work to meet their targets, they can build on the progress that ourcommunities and businesses are already making.
  
A lot of power companies have already begun modernizing their plants, reducing theiremissions -- and by the way, creating new jobs in the process.  Nearly a dozen states havealready set up their own market-based programs to reduce carbon pollution.  About half of ourstates have set energy efficiency targets.  More than 35 have set renewable energy targets.Over 1,000 mayors have signed an agreement to cut carbon pollution in their cities.  And lastweek, 13 of our biggest companies, including UPS and Walmart and GM, made bold, newcommitments to cut their emissions and deploy more clean energy.
So the idea of setting standards and cutting carbon pollution is not new.  It's not radical. Whatis new is that, starting today, Washington is starting to catch up with the vision of the rest ofthe country.  And by setting these standards, we can actually speed up our transition to acleaner, safer future.
With this Clean Power Plan, by 2030, carbon pollution from our power plants will be 32percent lower than it was a decade ago.  And the nerdier way to say that is that we’ll bekeeping 870 million tons of carbon dioxide pollution out of our atmosphere.  The simpler,layman’s way of saying that is it’s like cutting every ounce of emission due to electricity from108 million American homes.  Or it's the equivalent of taking 166 million cars off the road.
By 2030, we will reduce premature deaths from power plant emissions by nearly 90 percent --and thanks to this plan, there will be 90,000 fewer asthma attacks among our children eachyear.  And by combining this with greater investment in our booming clean energy sector, andsmarter investments in energy efficiency, and by working with the world to achieve a climateagreement by the end of this year, we can do more to slow, and maybe even eventually stop,the carbon pollution that’s doing so much harm to our climate.
So this is the right thing to do.  I want to thank, again, Gina and her team for doing it theright way.  Over the longest engagement process in EPA history, they fielded more than 4million public comments; they worked with states, they worked with power companies, andenvironmental groups, and faith groups, and people across our country to make sure thatwhat we were doing was realistic and achievable, but still ambitious.
And some of those people are with us here today.  So, Tanya Brown -- Tanya, wave, go ahead-- there’s Tanya. Tanya Brown has joined up with moms across America to spread the wordabout the dangers climate change pose to the health of our children -- including Tanya’sdaughter, Sanaa.  There’s Sanaa, right there.
Dr. Sumita Khatri has spent her career researching the health impacts of pollution at theCleveland Clinic, and helping families whose lives are impacted every single day.  Doctor,thank you.
  
Sister Joan Marie Steadman has helped rally Catholic women across America to take onclimate.  Sister, thank you so much for your leadership. And she’s got a pretty important guyon her side -- as Pope Francis made clear in his encyclical this summer, taking a stand againstclimate change is a moral obligation.  And Sister Steadman is living up to that obligation everysingle day.
Now, let’s be clear.  There will be critics of what we’re trying to do.  There will be cynics thatsay it cannot be done.  Long before the details of this Clean Power Plan were even decided,the special interests and their allies in Congress were already mobilizing to oppose it witheverything they’ve got. They will claim that this plan will cost you money -- even though thisplan, the analysis shows, will ultimately save the average American nearly $85 a year on theirenergy bills.
They’ll claim we need to slash our investments in clean energy, it's a waste of money -- eventhough they’re happy to spend billions of dollars a year in subsidizing oil companies.  They’llclaim this plan will kill jobs -- even though our transition to a cleaner energy economy has thesolar industry, to just name one example, creating jobs 10 times faster than the rest of theeconomy.
They’ll claim this plan is a “war on coal,” to scare up votes -- even as they ignore my plan toactually invest in revitalizing coal country, and supporting health care and retirement for coalminers and their families, and retraining those workers for better-paying jobs and healthierjobs.  Communities across America have been losing coal jobs for decades.  I want to workwith Congress to help them, not to use them as a political football.  Partisan press releasesaren’t going to help those families.
Even more cynical, we've got critics of this plan who are actually claiming that this will harmminority and low-income communities -- even though climate change hurts those Americansthe most, who are the most vulnerable.  Today, an African-American child is more than twiceas likely to be hospitalized from asthma; a Latino child is 40 percent more likely to die fromasthma.  So if you care about low-income, minority communities, start protecting the air thatthey breathe, and stop trying to rob them of their health care. You could also expand Medicaidin your states, by the way.
Here’s the thing.  We've heard these same stale arguments before.  Every time America hasmade progress, it's been despite these kind of claims.  Whenever America has set clear rulesand smarter standards for our air, our water, our children’s health, we get the same scarystories about killing jobs and businesses and freedom.  It's true.
I'm going to go off script here just for a second.  Because this is important -- becausesometimes I think we feel as if there’s nothing we can do.  Tomorrow is my birthday, so I'mstarting to reflect on age.  And in thinking about what we were doing here today, I wasreminded about landing in Los Angeles to attend a college as a freshman, as an 18-year-old. 
  
And it was late August.  I was moving from Hawaii.  And I got to the campus, and I decided --I had a lot of pent-up energy and I wanted to go take a run.  And after about five minutes,suddenly I had this weird feeling, I couldn't breathe.  And the reason was, back in 1979, LosAngeles still was so full of smog that there were days where people who were vulnerable justcould not go outside.  And they were fairly frequent.
And folks who are older than me can remember the Cayuga River burning because ofpollution, and acid rain threatening to destroy all the great forests of the Northeast.  And youfast-forward 30, 40 years later, and we solved those problems.  But at the time, the samecharacters who are going to be criticizing this plan were saying, this is going to kill jobs, this isgoing to destroy businesses, this is going to hurt low-income people, it's going to be wildlyexpensive.  And each time, they were wrong.
And because we pushed through, despite those scaremongering tactics, you can actually runin Los Angeles without choking.  And folks can actually take a boat out on that river.  Andthose forests are there.
So we got to learn lessons.  We got to know our history.  The kinds of criticisms that you'regoing to hear are simply excuses for inaction.  They’re not even good business sense.  Theyunderestimate American business and American ingenuity.
In 1970, when Republican President Richard Nixon decided to do something about the smogthat was choking our cities, they warned that the new pollution standards would decimate theauto industry.  It didn’t happen.  Catalytic converters worked.  Taking the lead out of gasolineworked.  Our air got cleaner.
In 1990, when Republican President George H.W. Bush decided to do something about acidrain, they said the bills would go up, our lights would go off, businesses would suffer “a quietdeath.” It didn’t happen.  We cut acid rain dramatically, and it cost much less than anybodyexpected -- because businesses, once incentivized, were able to figure it out.
When we restricted leaded fuel in our cars, cancer-causing chemicals in plastics, it didn’t endthe oil industry, it didn’t end the plastics industry; American chemists came up with bettersubstitutes.  The fuel standards we put in place a couple of years ago didn’t crippleautomakers.  The American auto industry retooled.  Today, our automakers are selling thebest cars in the world at a faster pace than they have in almost a decade.  They’ve got morehybrids, and more plug-ins, and more high fuel-efficient cars, giving consumers more choicethan ever before, and saving families at the pump.
We can figure this stuff out as long as we're not lazy about it; as long as we don't take thepath of least resistance.  Scientists, citizens, workers, entrepreneurs -- together asAmericans, we disrupt those stale, old debates, upend old ways of thinking.  Right now, we’reinventing whole new technologies, whole new industries -- not looking backwards, we'relooking forwards.
  
And if we don't do it, nobody will.  The only reason that China is now looking at gettingserious about its emissions is because they saw that we were going to do it, too.  When theworld faces its toughest challenges, America leads the way forward.  That’s what this plan isabout.
Now, I don't want to fool you here.  This is going to be hard; dealing with climate change inits entirety, it's challenging.  No single action, no single country will change the warming ofthe planet on its own.  But today, with America leading the way, countries representing 70percent of the carbon pollution from the world’s energy sector have announced plans to cuttheir greenhouse gas emissions.  In December, with America leading the way, we have achance to put in place one of the most ambitious international climate agreements in humanhistory.
And it’s easy to be cynical and to say climate change is the kind of challenge that’s just toobig for humanity to solve.  I am absolutely convinced that’s wrong.  We can solve this thing.But we have to get going.  It's exactly the kind of challenge that's big enough to remind usthat we’re all in this together.
Last month, for the first time since 1972, NASA released a “blue marble,” a single snapshot ofthe Earth taken from outer space.  And so much has changed in the decades between thatfirst picture and the second.  Borders have shifted, generations have come and gone, ourglobal population has nearly doubled.  But one thing hasn’t changed -- our planet is asbeautiful as ever.  It still looks blue.  And it's as vast, but also as fragile, as miraculous asanything in this universe.
This “blue marble” belongs to all of us.  It belongs to these kids who are here.  There aremore than 7 billion people alive today; no matter what country they’re from, no matter whatlanguage they speak, every one of them can look at this image and say, “That’s my home.”And “we’re the first generation to feel the impact of climate change; we're the last generationthat can do something about it.”  We only get one home.  We only get one planet.  There’s noplan B.
I don't want my grandkids not to be able to swim in Hawaii, or not to be able to climb amountain and see a glacier because we didn’t do something about it.  I don't want millions ofpeople’s lives disrupted and this world more dangerous because we didn’t do something aboutit.  That would be shameful of us.  This is our moment to get this right and leave somethingbetter for our kids.  Let’s make most of that opportunity.
Thank you, everybody.  God bless you. God bless the United States of America.
