Good afternoon, everybody. Please have a seat.
Over the past few weeks, I’ve been talking about what I believe should be our number-onepriority as a country -- building a better bargain for the middle class and for Americans whowant to work their way into the middle class. At the same time, I’m focused on my number-
one responsibility as Commander-in-Chief, and that's keeping the American people safe. Andin recent days, we’ve been reminded once again about the threats to our nation.
As I said at the National Defense University back in May, in meeting those threats we have tostrike the right balance between protecting our security and preserving our freedoms. And aspart of this rebalancing, I called for a review of our surveillance programs. Unfortunately,rather than an orderly and lawful process to debate these issues and come up withappropriate reforms, repeated leaks of classified information have initiated the debate in avery passionate, but not always fully informed way.
  
Now, keep in mind that as a senator, I expressed a healthy skepticism about these programs,and as President, I’ve taken steps to make sure they have strong oversight by all threebranches of government and clear safeguards to prevent abuse and protect the rights of theAmerican people. But given the history of abuse by governments, it’s right to ask questionsabout surveillance -- particularly as technology is reshaping every aspect of our lives.
I’m also mindful of how these issues are viewed overseas, because American leadershiparound the world depends upon the example of American democracy and American openness-- because what makes us different from other countries is not simply our ability to secure ournation, it’s the way we do it -- with open debate and democratic process.
In other words, it’s not enough for me, as President, to have confidence in these programs.The American people need to have confidence in them as well. And that's why, over the lastfew weeks, I’ve consulted members of Congress who come at this issue from many differentperspectives. I’ve asked the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board to review where ourcounterterrorism efforts and our values come into tension, and I directed my national securityteam to be more transparent and to pursue reforms of our laws and practices.
And so, today, I’d like to discuss four specific steps -- not all inclusive, but some specific stepsthat we’re going to be taking very shortly to move the debate forward.
First, I will work with Congress to pursue appropriate reforms to Section 215 of the Patriot Act-- the program that collects telephone records. As I’ve said, this program is an important toolin our effort to disrupt terrorist plots. And it does not allow the government to listen to anyphone calls without a warrant. But given the scale of this program, I understand the concernsof those who would worry that it could be subject to abuse. So after having a dialogue withmembers of Congress and civil libertarians, I believe that there are steps we can take to givethe American people additional confidence that there are additional safeguards against abuse.
For instance, we can take steps to put in place greater oversight, greater transparency, andconstraints on the use of this authority. So I look forward to working with Congress to meetthose objectives.
Second, I’ll work with Congress to improve the public’s confidence in the oversight conductedby the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, known as the FISC. The FISC was created byCongress to provide judicial review of certain intelligence activities so that a federal judgemust find that our actions are consistent with the Constitution. However, to build greaterconfidence, I think we should consider some additional changes to the FISC.
One of the concerns that people raise is that a judge reviewing a request from thegovernment to conduct programmatic surveillance only hears one side of the story -- may tiltit too far in favor of security, may not pay enough attention to liberty.
  
And while I’ve got confidence in the court and I think they’ve done a fine job, I think we canprovide greater assurances that the court is looking at these issues from both perspectives --security and privacy.
So, specifically, we can take steps to make sure civil liberties concerns have an independentvoice in appropriate cases by ensuring that the government’s position is challenged by anadversary.
Number three, we can, and must, be more transparent. So I’ve directed the intelligencecommunity to make public as much information about these programs as possible. We’vealready declassified unprecedented information about the NSA, but we can go further. So atmy direction, the Department of Justice will make public the legal rationale for thegovernment’s collection activities under Section 215 of the Patriot Act. The NSA is taking stepsto put in place a full-time civil liberties and privacy officer, and released information thatdetails its mission, authorities, and oversight. And finally, the intelligence community iscreating a website that will serve as a hub for further transparency, and this will giveAmericans and the world the ability to learn more about what our intelligence community doesand what it doesn’t do, how it carries out its mission, and why it does so.
Fourth, we’re forming a high-level group of outside experts to review our entire intelligenceand communications technologies. We need new thinking for a new era. We now have tounravel terrorist plots by finding a needle in the haystack of global telecommunications. Andmeanwhile, technology has given governments -- including our own -- unprecedentedcapability to monitor communications.
So I am tasking this independent group to step back and review our capabilities -- particularlyour surveillance technologies. And they’ll consider how we can maintain the trust of thepeople, how we can make sure that there absolutely is no abuse in terms of how thesesurveillance technologies are used, ask how surveillance impacts our foreign policy --particularly in an age when more and more information is becoming public. And they willprovide an interim report in 60 days and a final report by the end of this year, so that we canmove forward with a better understanding of how these programs impact our security, ourprivacy, and our foreign policy.
So all these steps are designed to ensure that the American people can trust that our effortsare in line with our interests and our values. And to others around the world, I want to makeclear once again that America is not interested in spying on ordinary people. Our intelligenceis focused, above all, on finding the information that’s necessary to protect our people, and --in many cases -- protect our allies.
It’s true we have significant capabilities. What’s also true is we show a restraint that manygovernments around the world don't even think to do, refuse to show -- and that includes, bythe way, some of America’s most vocal critics.
  
We shouldn’t forget the difference between the ability of our government to collectinformation online under strict guidelines and for narrow purposes, and the willingness ofsome other governments to throw their own citizens in prison for what they say online.
And let me close with one additional thought. The men and women of our intelligencecommunity work every single day to keep us safe because they love this country and believein our values. They're patriots. And I believe that those who have lawfully raised their voiceson behalf of privacy and civil liberties are also patriots who love our country and want it to liveup to our highest ideals. So this is how we’re going to resolve our differences in the UnitedStates -- through vigorous public debate, guided by our Constitution, with reverence for ourhistory as a nation of laws, and with respect for the facts.
So, with that, I’m going to take some questions. And let’s see who we’ve got here. We’regoing to start with Julie Pace of AP.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. I wanted to ask about some of the foreign policy falloutfrom the disclosure of the NSA programs that you discussed. Your spokesman said yesterdaythat there’s no question that the U.S. relationship with Russia has gotten worse since VladimirPutin took office. How much of that decline do you attribute directly to Mr. Putin, given thatyou seem to have had a good working relationship with his predecessor? Also will there be anyadditional punitive measures taken against Russia for granting asylum to Edward Snowden?Or is canceling the September summit really all you can do given the host of issues the U.S.needs Russian cooperation for? Thank you.
President Obama: Good. I think there’s always been some tension in the U.S.-Russianrelationship after the fall of the Soviet Union. There’s been cooperation in some areas; there’sbeen competition in others.
It is true that in my first four years, in working with President Medvedev, we made a lot ofprogress. We got START done -- or START II done. We were able to cooperate together onIran sanctions. They provided us help in terms of supplying our troops in Afghanistan. Wewere able to get Russia into the WTO -- which is not just good for Russia, it’s good for ourcompanies and businesses because they're more likely then to follow international norms andrules. So there's been a lot of good work that has been done and that is going to continue tobe done. What's also true is, is that when President Putin -- who was prime minister whenMedvedev was president -- came back into power I think we saw more rhetoric on the Russianside that was anti-American, that played into some of the old stereotypes about the Cold Warcontests between the United States and Russia. And I've encouraged Mr. Putin to thinkforward as opposed to backwards on those issues -- with mixed success.
And I think the latest episode is just one more in a number of emerging differences that we'veseen over the last several months around Syria, around human rights issues, where it isprobably appropriate for us to take a pause, reassess where it is that Russia is going, whatour core interests are, and calibrate the relationship so that we're doing things that are good
  
for the United States and hopefully good for Russia as well, but recognizing that there just aregoing to be some differences and we're not going to be able to completely disguise them.
And that's okay. Keep in mind that although I'm not attending the summit, I'll still be going toSt. Petersburg because Russia is hosting the G20. That's important business in terms of oureconomy and our jobs and all the issues that are of concern to Americans.
I know that one question that's been raised is how do we approach the Olympics. I want tojust make very clear right now I do not think it's appropriate to boycott the Olympics. We'vegot a bunch of Americans out there who are training hard, who are doing everything they canto succeed. Nobody is more offended than me by some of the anti-gay and lesbian legislationthat you've been seeing in Russia. But as I said just this week, I've spoken out against thatnot just with respect to Russia but a number of other countries where we continue to do workwith them, but we have a strong disagreement on this issue.
And one of the things I'm really looking forward to is maybe some gay and lesbian athletesbringing home the gold or silver or bronze, which I think would go a long way in rejecting thekind of attitudes that we're seeing there. And if Russia doesn't have gay or lesbian athletes,then it probably makes their team weaker.
Question: Are there going to be any additional punitive measures for Russia, beyondcanceling the summit?
President Obama: Keep in mind that our decision to not participate in the summit was notsimply around Mr. Snowden. It had to do with the fact that, frankly, on a whole range ofissues where we think we can make some progress, Russia has not moved. And so we don'tconsider that strictly punitive.
We're going to assess where the relationship can advance U.S. interests and increase peaceand stability and prosperity around the world. Where it can, we’re going to keep on workingwith them. Where we have differences, we’re going to say so clearly. And my hope is, is thatover time, Mr. Putin and Russia recognize that rather than a zero-sum competition, in fact, ifthe two countries are working together we can probably advance the betterment of bothpeoples.
Chuck Todd.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. Given that you just announced a whole bunch of reformsbased on essentially the leaks that Edward Snowden made on all of these surveillanceprograms, is that change -- is your mindset changed about him? Is he now more a whistle-
blower than he is a hacker, as you called him at one point, or somebody that shouldn’t be filedcharges? And should he be provided more protection? Is he a patriot? You just used thosewords. And then just to follow up on the personal -- I want to follow up on a personal --
  
President Obama: Okay, I want to make sure -- everybody is asking one question it wouldbe helpful.
Question: No, I understand. It was a part of a question that you didn’t answer. Can you getstuff done with Russia, big stuff done, without having a good personal relationship with Putin?
President Obama: I don’t have a bad personal relationship with Putin. When we haveconversations, they’re candid, they’re blunt; oftentimes, they’re constructive. I know thepress likes to focus on body language and he’s got that kind of slouch, looking like the boredkid in the back of the classroom. But the truth is, is that when we’re in conversationstogether, oftentimes it’s very productive.
So the issue here really has to do with where do they want to take Russia -- it’s substantiveon a policy front. And --
Question: [Inaudible]
President Obama: No. Right now, this is just a matter of where Mr. Putin and the Russianpeople want to go. I think if they are looking forward into the 21st century and how they canadvance their economy, and make sure that some of our joint concerns aroundcounterterrorism are managed effectively, then I think we can work together. If issues areframed as if the U.S. is for it then Russia should be against it, or we’re going to be findingways where we can poke each other at every opportunity, then probably we don’t get as muchstuff done.
See, now I’ve forgotten your first question, which presumably was the more important one.No, I don’t think Mr. Snowden was a patriot. As I said in my opening remarks, I called for athorough review of our surveillance operations before Mr. Snowden made these leaks.
My preference -- and I think the American people’s preference -- would have been for alawful, orderly examination of these laws, a thoughtful fact-based debate that would then leadus to a better place. Because I never made claims that all the surveillance technologies thathave developed since the time some of these laws had been put in place somehow didn'trequire potentially some additional reforms. That's exactly what I called for.
So the fact is, is that Mr. Snowden has been charged with three felonies. If, in fact, hebelieves that what he did was right, then, like every American citizen, he can come here,appear before the court with a lawyer and make his case. If the concern was that somehowthis was the only way to get this information out to the public, I signed an executive orderwell before Mr. Snowden leaked this information that provided whistleblower protection to theintelligence community -- for the first time. So there were other avenues available forsomebody whose conscience was stirred and thought that they needed to questiongovernment actions.
  
But having said that, once the leaks have happened, what we’ve seen is information come outin dribs and in drabs, sometimes coming out sideways. Once the information is out, theadministration comes in, tries to correct the record. But by that time, it’s too late or we’vemoved on, and a general impression has, I think, taken hold not only among the Americanpublic but also around the world that somehow we’re out there willy-nilly just sucking ininformation on everybody and doing what we please with it.
That's not the case. Our laws specifically prohibit us from surveilling U.S. persons without awarrant. And there are a whole range of safeguards that have been put in place to make surethat that basic principle is abided by.
But what is clear is that whether, because of the instinctive bias of the intelligence communityto keep everything very close -- and probably what’s a fair criticism is my assumption that ifwe had checks and balances from the courts and Congress, that that traditional system ofchecks and balances would be enough to give people assurance that these programs were runprobably -- that assumption I think proved to be undermined by what happened after theleaks. I think people have questions about this program.
And so, as a consequence, I think it is important for us to go ahead and answer thesequestions. What I’m going to be pushing the IC to do is rather than have a trunk come outhere and leg come out there and a tail come out there, let’s just put the whole elephant outthere so people know exactly what they're looking at. Let’s examine what is working, what’snot, are there additional protections that can be put in place, and let’s move forward.
And there’s no doubt that Mr. Snowden’s leaks triggered a much more rapid and passionateresponse than would have been the case if I had simply appointed this review board to gothrough, and I had sat down with Congress and we had worked this thing through. It wouldhave been less exciting. It would not have generated as much press. I actually think we wouldhave gotten to the same place, and we would have done so without putting at risk ournational security and some very vital ways that we are able to get intelligence that we need tosecure the country.
Major Garrett.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. I’d like to ask you about this debate that's playing itselfout in editorial pages, in the blogosphere, even in the Senate Democratic caucus, about thechoice you eventually will make for the next Federal Reserve chairman. There is a perceptionamong Democrats that Larry Summers has the inside track, and perhaps you’ve made someassurances to him about that. Janet Yellen is the vice chair of the Federal Reserve. There aremany women in the Senate who are Democrats who believe that breaking the glass ceilingthere would be historic and important.
President Obama: Right.
  
Question: Are you annoyed by this sort of roiling debate? Do you find it any way unseemly?And do you believe this will be one of the most important -- if not the most important --economic decisions you’ll make in the remainder of your presidency?
President Obama: It is definitely one of the most important economic decisions that I’llmake in the remainder of my presidency. The Federal Reserve chairman is not just one of themost important economic policymakers in America, he or she is one of the most importantpolicymakers in the world. And that person presumably will stay on after I’m President. Sothis, along with Supreme Court appointments, is probably as important a decision as I makeas President.
I have a range of outstanding candidates. You’ve mentioned two of them -- Mr. Summers andMr. Yellen -- Ms. Yellen. And they're both terrific people.
I think the perception that Mr. Summers might have an inside track simply had to do with abunch of attacks that I was hearing on Mr. Summers preemptively, which is sort of a standardWashington exercise, that I don't like. Because when somebody has worked hard for me andworked hard on behalf of the American people, and I know the quality of those people, and Isee them getting slapped around in the press for no reason -- before they’ve even beennominated for anything -- then I want to make sure that somebody is standing up for them. Ifelt the same way when people were attacking Susan Rice before she was nominated foranything. So I tend to defend folks who I think have done a good job and don't deserveattacks.
But I consider them both outstanding candidates. My main criteria -- I’ve stated this before,but I want to repeat it -- my main criteria for the Fed Reserve chairman is somebody whounderstands they’ve got a dual mandate. A critical part of the job is making sure that we keepinflation in check, that our monetary policy is sound, that the dollar is sound. Those are allcritical components of the job. And we’ve seen what happens when the Fed is not payingattention. We saw, prior to Paul Volcker coming into place, inflation shooting up in ways thatreally damaged the real economy.
But the other mandate is full employment. And right now, if you look at the biggest challengeswe have, the challenge is not inflation; the challenge is we’ve still got too many people out ofwork, too many long-term unemployed, too much slack in the economy, and we’re notgrowing as fast as we should. And so I want a Fed chairman who’s able to look at those issuesand have a perspective that keeps an eye on inflation, makes sure that we’re not seeingartificial bubbles in place, but also recognizing, you know what, a big part of my job right nowis to make sure the economy is growing quickly and robustly, and is sustained and durable, sothat people who work hard in this country are able to find a job.
And, frankly, I think both Larry Summers and Janet Yellen are highly qualified candidates.There are a couple of other candidates who are highly qualified as well. I’ll make the decisionin the fall.
  
Question: Can you see how the perception of you defending Larry Summers as vigorously asyou just did and in other quarters lead some to believe you’ve already made up your mind?
President Obama: Well, except I just told you I haven’t. Major, I’d defend you if somebodywas saying something that wasn’t true about you. I really would. In fact, I’ve done that in theWhite House some times. 
Carol Lee. And, Carol, congratulations on Hudson.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President.
President Obama: Do you have pictures?
Question: I do. I’ll have to show you --
President Obama: Okay, I’m going to have to see them.
Question: I appreciate you making it a slow news week.
I wanted to ask you about your evolution on the surveillance issues. I mean, part of whatyou’re talking about today is restoring the public trust. And the public has seen you evolvefrom when you were in the U.S. Senate to now. And even as recently as June, you said thatthe process was such that people should be comfortable with it, and now you’re saying you’remaking these reforms and people should be comfortable with those. So why should the publictrust you on this issue, and why did you change your position multiple times?
President Obama: Well, I think it’s important to say, Carol, first of all, I haven’t evolved inmy assessment of the actual programs. I consistently have said that when I came into office Ievaluated them. Some of these programs I had been critical of when I was in the Senate.When I looked through specifically what was being done, my determination was that the twoprograms in particular that had been at issue, 215 and 702, offered valuable intelligence thathelps us protect the American people and they're worth preserving. What we also saw wasthat some bolts needed to be tightened up on some of the programs, so we initiated someadditional oversight, reforms, compliance officers, audits and so forth.
And if you look at the reports -- even the disclosures that Mr. Snowden has put forward -- allthe stories that have been written, what you're not reading about is the government actuallyabusing these programs and listening in on people's phone calls or inappropriately readingpeople's emails. What you're hearing about is the prospect that these could be abused. Now,part of the reason they're not abused is because these checks are in place, and those abuseswould be against the law and would be against the orders of the FISC.
  
Having said that, though, if you are outside of the intelligence community, if you are theordinary person and you start seeing a bunch of headlines saying, U.S.-Big Brother lookingdown on you, collecting telephone records, et cetera, well, understandably, people would beconcerned. I would be, too, if I wasn't inside the government.
And so in light of the changed environment where a whole set of questions have been raised,some in the most sensationalized manner possible, where these leaks are released drip bydrip, one a week, to kind of maximize attention and see if they can catch us at someimprecision on something -- in light of that, it makes sense for us to go ahead, lay out whatexactly we're doing, have a discussion with Congress, have a discussion with industry -- whichis also impacted by this -- have a discussion with civil libertarians, and see can we do thisbetter.
I think the main thing I want to emphasize is I don't have an interest and the people at theNSA don't have an interest in doing anything other than making sure that where we canprevent a terrorist attack, where we can get information ahead of time, that we're able tocarry out that critical task. We do not have an interest in doing anything other than that. Andwe've tried to set up a system that is as failsafe as so far at least we've been able to think ofto make sure that these programs are not abused.
But people may have better ideas and people may want to jigger slightly sort of the balancebetween the information that we can get versus the incremental encroachments on privacythat if haven't already taken place might take place in a future administration, or astechnologies develop further.
And the other thing that’s happening is, is that as technology develops further, technologyitself may provide us some additional safeguards. So, for example, if people don’t haveconfidence that the law, the checks and balances of the court and Congress are sufficient togive us confidence that government is not snooping, well, maybe we can embed technologiesin there that prevent the snooping regardless of what government wants to do. I mean, theremay be some technological fixes that provide another layer of assurance.
And so those are the kinds of things that I’m looking forward to having a conversation about.
Question: Can you understand, though, why some people might not trust what you're sayingright now about wanting to --
President Obama: No, I can’t.
Question: -- that they should be comfortable with the process?
President Obama: Well, the fact that I said that the programs are operating in a way thatprevents abuse, that continues to be true, without the reforms. The question is how do I makethe American people more comfortable.
  
If I tell Michelle that I did the dishes -- now, granted, in the White House I don’t do the dishesthat much -- but back in the day -- and she’s a little skeptical, well, I’d like her to trust me,but maybe I need to bring her back and show her the dishes and not just have her take myword for it.
And so the program is -- I am comfortable that the program currently is not being abused. I’mcomfortable that if the American people examined exactly what was taking place, how it wasbeing used, what the safeguards were, that they would say, you know what, these folks arefollowing the law and doing what they say they’re doing.
But it is absolutely true that with the expansion of technology -- this is an area that’s movingvery quickly -- with the revelations that have depleted public trust, that if there are someadditional things that we can do to build that trust back up, then we should do them.
Jonathan Karl.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. You have said that core al Qaeda has been decimated,that its leaders are on the run. Now that we’ve seen this terror threat that has resulted inembassies closed throughout the Arab world, much of Africa, do you still believe that al Qaedahas been decimated? And if I can ask in the interest of transparency, can you tell us aboutthese drone strikes that we’ve seen over the last couple of weeks in Yemen?
President Obama: What I said in the same National Defense University speech back in Maythat I referred to earlier is that core al Qaeda is on its heels, has been decimated. But what Ialso said was that al Qaeda and other extremists have metastasized into regional groups thatcan pose significant dangers.
And I’d refer you back to that speech just back in May where I said specifically that althoughthey are less likely to be able to carry out spectacular homeland attacks like 9/11, they havethe capacity to go after our embassies. They have the capacity, potentially, to go after ourbusinesses. They have the capacity to be destabilizing and disruptive in countries where thesecurity apparatus is weak. And that’s exactly what we are seeing right now.
So it’s entirely consistent to say that this tightly organized and relatively centralized al Qaedathat attacked us on 9/11 has been broken apart and is very weak and does not have a lot ofoperational capacity, and to say we still have these regional organizations like AQAP that canpose a threat, that can drive potentially a truck bomb into an embassy wall and can kill somepeople.
And so that requires us, then, to make sure that we have a strategy that is strengtheningthose partners so that they’ve got their own capacity to deal with what are potentiallymanageable regional threats if these countries are a little bit stronger and have more effectiveCT and so forth.
  
It means that we’ve got to continue to be vigilant and go after known terrorists who arepotentially carrying out plots or are going to strengthen their capacity over time -- becausethey’re always testing the boundaries of, well, maybe we can try this, maybe we can do that.So this is a ongoing process. We are not going to completely eliminate terrorism. What we cando is to weaken it and to strengthen our partnerships in such a way that it does not pose thekind of horrible threat that we saw on 9/11.
And I’m not going to discuss specific operations that have taken place. Again, in my speech inMay, I was very specific about how we make these determinations about potential lethalstrikes, so I would refer you to that speech.
Question: So you won’t even confirm that we carried out drone strikes in Yemen?
President Obama: I will not have a discussion about operational issues.
Ed Henry.
Question: I hope you would defend me as well.
President Obama: I would.
Question: Okay, thank you. I want to ask you about two important dates that are coming up.October 1st you’ve got to implement your signature health care law. You recently decided onyour own to delay a key part of that. And I wonder, if you pick and choose what parts of thelaw to implement, couldn’t your successor down the road pick and choose whether they’llimplement your law and keep it in place?
And on September 11th we’ll have the first anniversary of Benghazi. And you said onSeptember 12th, “Make no mistake, we’ll bring to justice the killers who attacked our people.”Eleven months later, where are they, sir?
President Obama: Well, I also said that we’d get bin Laden, and I didn’t get him in 11months. So we have informed, I think, the public that there’s a sealed indictment. It’s sealedfor a reason. But we are intent on capturing those who carried out this attack, and we’re goingto stay on it until we get them.
Question: And you’re close to having suspects in custody?
President Obama: I will leave it at that. But this remains a top priority for us. Anybody whoattacks Americans, anybody who kills, tragically, four Americans who were serving us in avery dangerous place, we’re going to do everything we can to get those who carried out thoseattacks.
  
With respect to health care, I didn’t simply choose to delay this on my own. This was inconsultation with businesses all across the country, many of whom are supportive of theAffordable Care Act, but -- and many of whom, by the way, are already providing healthinsurance to their employees but were concerned about the operational details of changingtheir HR operations, if they’ve got a lot of employees, which could be costly for them, andthem suggesting that there may be easier ways to do this.
Now, what’s true, Ed, is, is that in a normal political environment, it would have been easierfor me to simply call up the Speaker and say, you know what, this is a tweak that doesn’t goto the essence of the law -- it has to do with, for example, are we able to simplify theattestation of employers as to whether they’re already providing health insurance or not -- itlooks like there may be some better ways to do this; let's make a technical change to the law.That would be the normal thing that I would prefer to do.
But we're not in a normal atmosphere around here when it comes to "Obamacare." We didhave the executive authority to do so, and we did so. But this doesn't go to the core ofimplementation. Let me tell you what is the core of implementation that's already taken place.As we speak, right now, for the 85 percent of Americans who already have health insurance,they are benefiting from being able to keep their kid on their plan if their kid is 26 or younger.That's benefiting millions of young people around the country, which is why lack of insuranceamong young people has actually gone down. That's in large part attributable to the stepsthat we've taken.
You've got millions of people who have received rebates, because part of the Affordable CareAct was to say that if an insurance company isn't spending 80 percent of your premium onyour health care, you get some money back. And, lo and behold, people have been gettingtheir money back. It means that folks who have been bumping up with lifetime limits on theirinsurance, that it leaves them vulnerable. That doesn't exist.
Seniors have been getting discounts on their prescription drugs. That's happening right now.Free preventive care -- mammograms, contraception. That's happening right now. I met ayoung man today on a bill signing I was doing with the student loan bill who came up to meand said thank you -- he couldn't have been more than 25, 26 years old -- thank you; I havecancer, thanks to the Affordable Care Act working with the California program, I was able toget health care and I'm now in remission. And so right now people are already benefiting.
Now, what happens on October 1st, in 53 days, is for the remaining 15 percent of thepopulation that doesn’t have health insurance, they're going to be able to go on a website orcall up a call center and sign up for affordable quality health insurance at a significantlycheaper rate than what they can get right now on the individual market. And if even withlower premiums they still can't afford it, we're going to be able to provide them with a taxcredit to help them buy it. And between October 1st into March there will be an openenrollment period in which millions of Americans for the first time are going to be able to getaffordable health care.
  
Now, I think the really interesting question is why it is that my friends in the other party havemade the idea of preventing these people from getting health care their holy grail, theirnumber-one priority. The one unifying principle in the Republican Party at the moment ismaking sure that 30 million people don't have health care and, presumably, repealing allthose benefits I just mentioned -- kids staying on their parents' plan; seniors gettingdiscounts on their prescription drugs; I guess a return to lifetime limits on insurance; peoplewith preexisting conditions continuing to be blocked from being able to get health insurance.
That's hard to understand as an agenda that is going to strengthen our middle class. At leastthey used to say, well, we're going to replace it with something better. There’s not even apretense now that they're going to replace it with something better.
The notion is simply that those 30 million people, or the 150 million who are benefiting fromthe other aspects of Affordable Care, will be better off without it. That's their assertion -- notbacked by fact, not backed by any evidence. It’s just become an ideological fixation.
Well, I tell you what, they're wrong about that. There is no doubt that in implementing theAffordable Care Act, a program of this significance, there are going to be some glitches. Nodoubt about it. There are going to be things where we say, you know what, we should havethought of that earlier. Or this would work a little bit better. Or this needs an adjustment.That was true of Social Security. That was true of Medicare. That was true of the Children’sHealth Insurance Program. That was true of the prescription drug program, Part D, that wasrolled out by a Republican President and supported by Republicans who are still in the Houseof Representatives. That's true, by the way, of a car company rolling out a new car. It’s trueof Apple rolling out the new iPad.
So you will be able to, whenever you want during the course of the next six months andprobably the next year, find occasions where you say, ah-ha, you know what, that could havebeen done a little bit better. Or that thing, they're kind of making an administrative change;that's now how it was originally thought this thing was going to work. Yes, exactly. Becauseour goal is to actually deliver high-quality, affordable health care for people and to reform thesystem so costs start going down and people start getting a better bang for the buck. And Imake no apologies for that.
And let me just make one last point about this. The idea that you would shut down thegovernment unless you prevent 30 million people from getting health care is a bad idea. Whatyou should be thinking about is how can we advance and improve ways for middle-classfamilies to have some security so that if they work hard, they can get ahead and their kidscan get ahead.
Jessica Yellin.
  
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. And following on what you just said, Republicans in theHouse might give you that choice soon to either allow the government to shut down or seeObamacare defunded. Would you choose to let the government shut down to ensure thatObamacare remains funded?
President Obama: Well, I’m not going to engage in hypotheticals. I can tell you that theAmerican people would have difficulty understanding why we would weaken our economy,shut down our government, shut down vital services, have people who are not getting paidwho then can't go to restaurants or shop for clothes, or all the other things that we’re doinghere because Republicans have determined that they don't want to see these folks get healthcare.
Again, they used to say they had a replacement. That never actually arrived, right? I mean,I’ve been hearing about this whole replacement thing for two years -- now I just don’t hearabout it, because basically they don’t have an agenda to provide health insurance to people ataffordable rates. And the idea that you would shut down the government at a time when therecovery is getting some traction; where we’re growing, although not as fast as we need to;where the housing market is recovering, although not as fast as we would like; that we wouldprecipitate another crisis here in Washington that no economist thinks is a good idea -- I’massuming that they will not take that path. I have confidence that common sense, in the end,will prevail.
Question: And if they do, sir, you will have to make that choice?
President Obama: We’ll see what happens. We’ve got a couple of months.
Question: When’s the last time you spoke to Speaker Boehner about the budget?
President Obama: Fairly recently, yes. Probably right before they left.
Okay. Scott Horseley.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. Part of the political logic behind immigration reform wasthe strong showing by Latino voters last November. That doesn’t seem to resonate with a lotof House Republicans who represent overwhelmingly white districts. What other politicalleverage can you bring to bear to help move a bill in the House?
President Obama: Well, we’ve got an economic report that shows that our economy wouldbe a trillion dollars stronger if we get immigration reform done. We’ve got evidence that ourhousing market would be stronger if immigrants are in a situation in which, having paid a fine,having paid back taxes, that they now have the ability to actually enter into the housingmarket. We’ve got strong evidence that our technological and research edge would be better ifwe get immigration reform done.
  
We know that the Senate bill strengthens border security, puts unprecedented resources ontop of the unprecedented resources I’ve already put into border security. So if your mainpriority is border security, I’d think you’d want to vote for this bill. We know that the Senatebill creates a system in which employers are held accountable for when they hireundocumented workers. This is something that people say is a bad thing. I agree. Let’s makesure that that system for holding employers accountable is in place.
So when I hear the opposition to immigration reform, I just run through the list of thingsthey’re concerned about, I look at what the Senate bill does, and I say to myself, you knowwhat, the Senate bill actually improves the situation on every issue that they say they’reconcerned about.
Now, what they may argue is it doesn’t solve the problem 100 percent. I don’t know a lawthat solves a problem 100 percent. Social Security lifted millions of seniors out of poverty, butthere are still some poor seniors. The Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act drasticallyreduced discrimination in America, but there’s still discrimination. That doesn’t make thembad laws, it just means that there are very few human problems that are 100 percentsolvable.
So what I see right now is a strong bipartisan vote coming out of the Senate. I think that theSpeaker and others have said they need to do something, and I’d urge, when they get back,to do something -- put forward a bill that has an opportunity to actually pass. It may not beprecisely what’s in the Senate bill. My preference would be for them to go ahead and call theSenate bill. But if they’ve got some additional ideas, I think the Senate is happy to considerthem. And get that bill on the floor, put it up for a vote.
I am absolutely certain that the votes for the Senate bill -- which strengthens border security;demands responsibility from undocumented workers to pay a fine, pay a penalty and get tothe back of the line; reforms our legal immigration system; holds employers accountable -- Iam absolutely confident that if that bill was on the floor of the House, it would pass.
So the challenge right now is not that there aren’t a majority of House members, just like amajority of Senate members, who aren’t prepared to support this bill. The problem is internalRepublican caucus politics. And that’s what the American people don’t want us to be worryingabout. Don’t worry about your Washington politics. Solve problems.
And this is one where you’ve actually got some pretty broad consensus. I don’t know an issuewhere you’ve got labor, the Chamber of Commerce, evangelicals, student groups -- you nameit -- supportive of a bill. Let’s get it done.
Thank you very much, everybody.
