I -- I've got a few introductions that I want to make very quickly before I start my remarks. First of all, I think that by the end of his tenure we're going to know that Ken Salazar is one ofthe finest Secretaries of Interior we've ever had.  So please give him a big round of applause.
Other members of what we call our green team are here:  Steven Chu, our Secretary ofEnergy; Martha Johnson, the Administrator of the GSA; Nancy Sutley, the CEQ Chair.  We'vegot Carol Browner, who’s the White House Energy and Climate Change Director.  Please givethem a big round of applause.  They put in a lot of work.
Governor Martin O’Malley is here, governor of Maryland.  Ray Mabus, Secretary of the Navy, ishere. Admiral Gary Roughead, Chief of Naval Operations, is here, and we appreciate hisoutstanding service.  Thank you, Gar.
I want to thank Steven Shepro, the base commander here at Andrews, and the leadershipthat's present from the Air Force, the Marine Corps, and the Coast Guard.
  
Ken and I were colleagues in the Senate, and I appointed him because I knew that he wouldbe a faithful and pragmatic steward of our natural resources.  And as Secretary, he ischanging the way that the Interior Department does business so that we’re responsiblydeveloping traditional sources of energy and renewable sources of energy, from the wind onthe high plains to the suns in the desert to the waves off our coasts.  And so I'm very gratefulto the work that he’s done in culminating in one of the announcements that we’re makingtoday.
It’s also good to see so many members of our Armed Forces here today.  Andrews is the homeof Air Force One, and I appreciate everything that you do for me and my family.  I shouldpoint out that you’ve got a 100-percent on-time departure record. You don’t charge forluggage -- so it’s a pretty good deal.  And I want to thank you not only for the support thatyou provide me, but also for the service that you perform to keep our country safe each andevery day.  So I'm very grateful to all of you.
We’re here to talk about America’s energy security, an issue that’s been a priority for myadministration since the day I took office.  Already, we’ve made the largest investment inclean energy in our nation’s history.  It’s an investment that’s expected to create or savemore than 700,000 jobs across America -- jobs manufacturing advanced batteries for moreefficient vehicles; upgrading the power grid so that it’s smarter and it’s stronger; doubling ournation’s capacity to generate renewable electricity from sources like the wind and the sun.
And just a few months after taking office, I also gathered the leaders of the world’s largestautomakers, the heads of labor unions, environmental advocates, and public officials fromCalifornia and across the country to reach a historic agreement to raise fuel economystandards in cars and trucks.  And tomorrow, after decades in which we have done little toincrease auto efficiency, those new standards will be finalized, which will reduce ourdependence on oil while helping folks spend a little less at the pump.
So my administration is upholding its end of the deal, and we expect all parties to do thesame.  And I’d also point out this rule that we’re going to be announcing about increasedmileage standards will save 1.8 billion -- billion barrels of oil overall -- 1.8 billion barrels ofoil.  And that’s like taking 58 million cars off the road for an entire year.
Today, we’re also going to go one step further.  In order to save energy and taxpayer dollars,my administration -- led by Secretary Chu at Energy, as well as Administrator Johnson at GSA-- is doubling the number of hybrid vehicles in the federal fleet, even as we seek to reduce thenumber of cars and trucks used by our government overall.  So we’re going to lead byexample and practice what we preach:  cutting waste, saving energy, and reducing ourreliance on foreign oil.
  
But we have to do more.  We need to make continued investments in clean coal technologiesand advanced biofuels.  A few weeks ago, I announced loan guarantees to break ground onAmerica’s first new nuclear facility in three decades, a project that will create thousands ofjobs.  And in the short term, as we transition to cleaner energy sources, we’ve still got tomake some tough decisions about opening new offshore areas for oil and gas development inways that protect communities and protect coastlines.
This is not a decision that I’ve made lightly.  It’s one that Ken and I -- as well as CarolBrowner, my energy advisor, and others in my administration -- looked at closely for morethan a year.  But the bottom line is this:  Given our energy needs, in order to sustaineconomic growth and produce jobs, and keep our businesses competitive, we are going toneed to harness traditional sources of fuel even as we ramp up production of new sources ofrenewable, homegrown energy.
So today we’re announcing the expansion of offshore oil and gas exploration, but in ways thatbalance the need to harness domestic energy resources and the need to protect America’snatural resources.  Under the leadership of Secretary Salazar, we’ll employ new technologiesthat reduce the impact of oil exploration.  We’ll protect areas that are vital to tourism, theenvironment, and our national security.  And we’ll be guided not by political ideology, but byscientific evidence.
That's why my administration will consider potential areas for development in the mid andsouth Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico, while studying and protecting sensitive areas in theArctic.  That’s why we’ll continue to support development of leased areas off the North Slopeof Alaska, while protecting Alaska’s Bristol Bay.
There will be those who strongly disagree with this decision, including those who say weshould not open any new areas to drilling.  But what I want to emphasize is that thisannouncement is part of a broader strategy that will move us from an economy that runs onfossil fuels and foreign oil to one that relies more on homegrown fuels and clean energy.  Andthe only way this transition will succeed is if it strengthens our economy in the short term andthe long run.  To fail to recognize this reality would be a mistake.
On the other side, there are going to be some who argue that we don’t go nearly far enough;who suggest we should open all our waters to energy exploration without any restriction orregard for the broader environmental and economic impact.  And to those folks I’ve got to saythis:  We have less than 2 percent of the world’s oil reserves; we consume more than 20percent of the world’s oil.  And what that means is that drilling alone can’t come close tomeeting our long-term energy needs.  And for the sake of our planet and our energyindependence, we need to begin the transition to cleaner fuels now.
  
So the answer is not drilling everywhere all the time.  But the answer is not, also, for us toignore the fact that we are going to need vital energy sources to maintain our economicgrowth and our security.  Ultimately, we need to move beyond the tired debates of the leftand the right, between business leaders and environmentalists, between those who wouldclaim drilling is a cure all and those who would claim it has no place.  Because this issue isjust too important to allow our progress to languish while we fight the same old battles overand over again.
For decades we’ve talked about how our dependence on foreign oil threatens our economy -–yet our will to act rises and falls with the price of a barrel of oil.  When gas gets expensive atthe pump, suddenly everybody is an energy expert.  And when it goes back down, everybodyis back to their old habits.
For decades we’ve talked about the threat to future generations posed by our current systemof energy –- even as we can see the mounting evidence of climate change from the ArcticCircle to the Gulf Coast.  And this is particularly relevant to all of you who are serving inuniform:  For decades, we’ve talked about the risks to our security created by dependence onforeign oil, but that dependence has actually grown year after year after year after year.
And while our politics has remained entrenched along these worn divides, the ground hasshifted beneath our feet.  Around the world, countries are seeking an edge in the globalmarketplace by investing in new ways of producing and saving energy.  From China toGermany, these nations recognize that the nation that leads the clean energy economy will bethe country that leads the global economy.  And meanwhile, here at home, as politicians inWashington debate endlessly about whether to act, our own military has determined that wecan no longer afford not to.
Some of the press may be wondering why we are announcing offshore drilling in a hangar atAndrews Air Force Base.  Well, if there’s any doubt about the leadership that our military isshowing, you just need to look at this F-18 fighter and the light-armored vehicle behind me. The Army and Marine Corps have been testing this vehicle on a mixture of biofuels.  And thisNavy fighter jet -- appropriately called the Green Hornet -- will be flown for the first time injust a few days, on Earth Day.  If tests go as planned, it will be the first plane ever to flyfaster than the speed of sound on a fuel mix that is half biomass.  The Air Force is also testingjet engines using biofuels and had the first successful biofuel-powered test flight just lastweek.  I don’t want to drum up any kind of rivalry here, but -- 
Now, the Pentagon isn’t seeking these alternative fuels just to protect our environment;they’re pursuing these homegrown energy sources to protect our national security.  Ourmilitary leaders recognize the security imperative of increasing the use of alternative fuels,decreasing energy use, reducing our reliance on imported oil, making ourselves more energy-
efficient. That’s why the Navy, led by Secretary Mabus, who’s here today, has set a goal ofusing 50-percent alternative fuels in all planes, vehicles, and ships in the next 10 years. 
  
That’s why the Defense Department has invested 2.7 billion dollars this year alone to improveenergy efficiency.
So moving towards clean energy is about our security.  It’s also about our economy.  And it’sabout the future of our planet. And what I hope is, is the policies that we’ve laid out -- fromhybrid fleets to offshore drilling, from nuclear energy to wind energy -- underscores theseriousness with which my administration takes this challenge.  It’s a challenge that requiresus to break out of the old ways of thinking, to think and act anew.  And it requires each of us,regardless of whether we’re in the private sector or the public sector, whether we’re in themilitary or in the civilian side of government, to think about how could we be doing thingsbetter, how could we be doing things smarter -- so that we are no longer tethered to thewhims of what happens somewhere in the Middle East or with other major oil-producingnations.
So I’m open to proposals from my Democratic friends and my Republican friends.  I think thatwe can break out of the broken politics of the past when it comes to our energy policy.  Iknow that we can come together to pass comprehensive energy and climate legislation that’sgoing to foster new energy -- new industries, create millions of new jobs, protect our planet,and help us become more energy independent.  That’s what we can do.  That is what we mustdo.  And I’m confident that is what we will do.
So thank you very much.  And thanks, again, to all of you who are serving in our ArmedServices.  You are making an enormous contribution, and this is just one example of theleadership that you’re showing.
Thank you very much.
