Good afternoon, everybody.  Let me begin by once again thanking the government and thepeople of Malaysia for hosting us at the U.S.-ASEAN and East Asia Summits.  Thesegatherings are enormous undertakings, but thanks to Malaysia’s leadership and incrediblehospitality, they have been a great success.
Earlier this week, as I headed to this region, there was a headline in one of our publicationsback home that asked -- “Obama’s Asian Distraction?” And the premise seemed to be that thisregion was somehow disconnected from pressing global events. I could not disagree more. This region is not a distraction from the world’s central challenges, like terrorism.  The AsiaPacific is absolutely critical to promoting security, prosperity and human dignity around theworld.  That’s why I’ve devoted so much of my foreign policy to deepening America’sengagement with this region.  And I’m pleased that on this trip we made progress across theboard. 
With my fellow leaders from Japan, Australia and the Philippines, I reaffirmed that our treatyalliances remain the foundation of regional security.  The United States is boosting our supportfor the Philippines' maritime capabilities and those of our regional partners.  At the U.S.-
ASEAN and East Asia Summits, a key topic was the South China Sea, and many leaders spokeabout the need to uphold international principles, including the freedom of navigation andoverflight and the peaceful resolution of disputes.  And to make sure we keep deepening ourpartnership here in Southeast Asia, I invited all 10 ASEAN leaders to the United States nextyear.  I’m pleased they accepted, and I look forward to continuing our work.
  
On the economic front, we worked with our APEC partners to advance a regional economicorder where all nations play by the same set of rules.  Based on my meeting with our Trans-
Pacific Partnership countries, I am optimistic that our 12 nations will approve this pact andthat we can increasingly focus on implementing it.  
APEC joined the G20 in sending an unequivocal message that we need to reach an ambitiousclimate change agreement in Paris. I also want to note the landmark step we took this weekwith more than 30 other nations at the OECD to dramatically reduce subsidies for coal-firedpower plants around the world -- which is an important way to advance the fight againstclimate change.     Of course, given the events of this week, much of my work here in Asia focused on the urgentthreat of terrorism.  Today, families in too many nations are grieving the senseless loss oftheir loved ones in the attacks in France and in Mali.  As Americans, we remember NohemiGonzalez, who was just 23 years old, a design major from California State University.  Shewas in Paris to pursue her dream of designing innovations that would improve the lives ofpeople around the world.  And we remember Anita Datar of Maryland.  She’s a veteran of thePeace Corps, a mother to her young son, who devoted her life to helping the world’s poor,including women and girls in Mali, lift themselves up with health and education.  
Nohemi and Anita embodied the values of service and compassion that no terrorist canextinguish.  Their legacy will endure in the family and friends who carry on their work.  Theyremind me of my daughters, or my mother, who, on the one hand, had their whole life aheadof them, and on the other hand, had devoted their lives to helping other people.  And it isworth us remembering when we look at the statistics that there are beautiful, wonderful livesbehind the terrible death tolls that we see in these places. 
Over the years, our friends here in Asia have been victims of terrorism, and many of them areclose counterterrorism partners with us.  So my time here has also been an opportunity towork with many of our partners in the Asia Pacific that are members of our coalition againstISIL -- Australia, Canada, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan.
Which brings me to the point I want to emphasize today.  For more than a year, the UnitedStates has built and led a broad coalition against ISIL of some 65 nations.  Given the frequentfocus on America’s leadership of this campaign, sometimes the contributions of our partnersare overlooked.  In fact, since the G20, a number of our coalition members have stepped upwith new commitments.  So today I want to take a moment to recognize how our allies andpartners help advance every element of our strategy.  
Nearly two dozen nations -- among them Turkey and our Arab partners -- contribute in someway to the military campaign, which has taken more than 8,000 strikes against ISIL so far. And as I’ve said, we’re ready to welcome or cooperate with other countries that aredetermined to truly fight ISIL as well.
  
Fifteen countries have deployed personnel to train and support local forces in Iraq.  TheUnited Arab Emirates and Germany are organizing 25 coalition partners in helping to stabilizeareas in Iraq liberated from ISIL.  Italy is coordinating the multinational effort to train Iraqipolice.  
On the political front, U.S. leadership brought all the key countries together in the Vienna todiscuss a common understanding on the principles for ending the Syrian civil war. On thehumanitarian front, the United States is helping to lead the effort to mobilize more aid for theSyrian people, including refugees.    
More than 40 countries have now passed or strengthened laws to prevent the flow of foreignterrorist fighters, and 34 nations, including the United States, have arrested foreign terroristfighters.  Saudi Arabia is helping to coordinate the crackdown on ISIL financing.  The UnitedArab Emirates’ new messaging center is working to discredit ISIL’s propaganda, and Malaysiajust announced the creation of its own center to do the same.  And by joining our summit atthe United Nations that we organized this fall, more than 100 nations, more than 20multilateral institutions and some 120 civil society groups -- including many leaders fromMuslim communities around the world -- have become part of a global movement against ISILand its twisted ideology.
All of which is to say that our coalition will not relent.  We will not accept the idea thatterrorist assaults on restaurants and theaters and hotels are the new normal -- or that we arepowerless to stop them.  After all, that’s precisely what terrorists like ISIL want, because,ultimately, that’s the only way that they can win.  That’s the very nature of terrorism --theycan’t beat us on the battlefield, so they try to terrorize us into being afraid, into changing ourpatterns of behavior, into panicking, into abandoning our allies and partners, into retreatingfrom the world.  And as President, I will not let that happen.    
In our diverse societies, everybody can do their part.  And we will not give in to fear, or startturning on each other, or treating some people differently because of religion or race orbackground.  That wouldn’t just be a betrayal of our values, it would also feed ISIL’spropaganda -- there assertion, which is absolutely false, that we must absolutely reject, thatwe are somehow at war with an entire religion.  The United States could never be at war withany religion because America is made up of multiple religions.  We're strengthened by peoplefrom every religion, including Muslim Americans.  
So I want to be as clear as I can on this:  Prejudice and discrimination helps ISIL andundermines our national security.  And so, even as we destroy ISIL on the battlefield -- andwe will destroy them -- we will take back land that they are currently in.  We will cut off theirfinancing.  We will hunt down their leadership.  We will dismantle their networks and theirsupply lines, and we will ultimately destroy them.  Even as we are in the process of doingthat, we want to make sure that we don't lose our own values and our own principles.  And wecan all do our part by upholding the values of tolerance and diversity and equality that helpkeep America strong.  
  
The United States will continue to lead this global coalition.  We are intensifying our strategyon all fronts, with local partners on the ground.  We are going to keep on rolling back ISIL inIraq and in Syria, and take out more of their leaders and commanders so that they do notthreaten us.  And we will destroy this terrorist organization.  
And we’ll keep working with our allies and partners for the opportunity and justice that helpsdefeat violent extremism.  We’ll keep standing up for the human rights and dignity of allpeople -- because that is contrary to what these terrorists believe.  That's part of how wedefeat them.  And I'm confident we will succeed.  The hateful vision of an organization likeISIL is no match for the strength of nations and people around the world who are united tolive in security and peace and in harmony.
So with that, I'm going to take a couple of questions.  We'll start with Angela Greiling-Keaneof Bloomberg.
 
Question: Thank you, Mr. President.  You're scheduled to meet this week with PresidentHollande in Washington to talk about stepping up efforts against ISIL even further.  Given thatRussia would be part of the coalition that France proposes, have you seen any signs in thepast couple days of Russia redirecting its military efforts in Syria to actually focus on ISIL? Are there any circumstances that you could see President Assad remaining in power, even ifonly temporarily, if that's what it took to effectively have a broad alliance directed at ISIL?And finally, as you've said, the U.S. won’t work with Russia if their goal is to keep Assad inpower.  If that's the case, is defeating ISIL or destroying ISIL a realistic goal?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, destroying ISIL is not only a realistic goal, we're goingto get it done, and we're going to pursue it with every aspect of American power and with allthe coalition partners that we’ve assembled.  It’s going to get done.
It will be helpful if Russia directs its focus on ISIL, and I do think that as a consequence ofISIL claiming responsibility for bringing down their plane, there is an increasing awareness onthe part of President Putin that ISIL poses a greater threat to them than anything else in theregion.  The question at this point is whether they can make the strategic adjustment thatallows them to be effective partners with us and the other 65 countries who are already partof the counter-ISIL campaign.  And we don't know that yet.  
So far, over the last several weeks, when they started taking strikes in Syria, their principaltargets have been the moderate opposition that they felt threatened Assad.  Their principalgoal appeared to be -- if you follow the strikes that they took -- to fortify the position of theAssad regime.  And that does not add to our efforts against ISIL.  In some ways, itstrengthens it because ISIL is also fighting many of those groups that the Russians werehitting.
  
When we were in Turkey I discussed with President Putin, in a brief pull-aside, his need torecognize that he needs to go after the people who killed Russian citizens.  And those aren’tthe groups that they were currently hitting with strikes.  So they're going to have to make anadjustment in terms of what they're prioritizing.  
More broadly -- I’ve said this before; I said it to President Putin five years ago and I repeatedit to him just a few days ago -- the issue with Assad is not simply the way that he has treatedhis people.  It’s not just a human rights issues. It’s not just a question of supportingsomebody who has been ruthlessly dropping bombs on his own civilian populations.  As apractical matter, it is not conceivable that Mr. Assad can regain legitimacy in a country inwhich a large majority of that country despises Assad and will not stop fighting so long as he’sin power, which means that the civil war perpetuates itself.
And so the goal in Vienna is to see if -- with all the countries around the table, including SaudiArabia, and Turkey, and Iran, and Russia, as well as the United States and other countriesthat have concerns about this -- whether we can arrive at a political transition process thatrecognizes the need for a new government and can quell the fighting and bring about aceasefire and allows all of us to refocus our attention on this barbaric organization that iskilling so many people.
Russia has not officially committed to a transition of Assad moving out, but they did agree tothe political transition process.  And I think we’ll find out over the next several weeks whetheror not we can bring about that change of perspective with the Russians.
Keep in mind that we all have an interest in maintaining a Syrian state because we don’t wantcomplete chaos.  I mean, and there are problems that we’ve seen in, for example, Lebanon,when the machinery of state entirely breaks down.  So there’s going to be a need for theinternational community and the United Nations to work in order to maintain -- maintaining aSyrian state and be able to move forward with a political transition that’s orderly. And that’sgoing to be difficult, but that’s what we have to focus on.
In terms of the position of the United States and the other 65 members of the coalition, myview on Assad is it will not work to keep him in power.  We can’t stop the fighting.  Even if Iwere to cynically say that my priority is ISIL and not removing Assad regardless of the terriblethings that he’s done to his people, the United States could not stop the fighting in Syria bythose who are opposed to Assad’s rule.  And so this is a practical issue, not just a matter ofconscience.  And I think that there are a large number of members of this coalition, includingPresident Hollande, who agree with me on that.      Michael Shear.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President.  On a different topic -- when you go to Paris next weekfor the climate talks, you do so in the shadow of what happened in that city a week ago. Could you talk a little bit about how you think those terror attacks might affect the talks? 
  
And substantively, on the talks, can you talk a little bit about concerns that the United Statesmight not have the ability to convince poor countries that nations will help them pay for whatthey need to do to achieve the climate talks, given especially the Republican opposition backhome?  And on one separate matter, could you comment on the investigations that wereported about in our paper this morning into whether or not intelligence officials are alteringthe assessments of the ISIL campaign to make them seem more rosy?
President Obama:  I’ll take the last question first.  One of the things I insisted on the day Iwalked into the Oval Office was that I don’t want intelligence shaded by politics.  I don’t wantit shaded by the desire to tell a feel-good story.  We can’t make good policy unless we’ve gotgood, accurate, hard-headed, clear-eyed intelligence.  I believe that the Department ofDefense and all those who head up our intelligence agencies understand that, and that I havemade it repeatedly clear to all my top national security advisors that I never want them tohold back, even if the intelligence or their opinions about the intelligence, their analysis orinterpretations of the data contradict current policy.  So that’s a message that we’ve beenadamant about from the start.
I don’t know what we’ll discover with respect to what was going on at CENTCOM.  I thinkthat’s something that’s best left to the IG and the processes.  I have communicated onceagain to both the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs as well as Secretary Carter that I expect thatwe get to the bottom of whether or not what you describe has been happening. 
There are always going to be some disputes with respect to how to interpret facts on theground.  I get intelligence briefings every single day, and there are times where they’remaking their best judgments -- they’ll say, with moderate confidence, or low confidence, orhigh confidence, this is what we think is happening.  There may be times where there aredisputes internally among various intelligence agencies about that.  But I don’t know thedetails of this.  What I do know is my expectation, which is the highest fidelity to facts, data --the truth.  
And if there are disagreements in terms of how folks are interpreting the facts, then thatshould be reflected in the reports that we receive -- that some folks think this is going on;other folks thinks that’s going on.  And that’s part of what I weigh in terms of makingdecisions.  
One last thing I’ll say, though -- as a consumer of this intelligence, it’s not as if I’ve beenreceiving wonderfully rosy, glowing portraits of what’s been happening in Iraq and Syria overthe last year and a half.  So to the extent that it’s been shaded -- again, I don’t know thedetails of what the IG may discover -- but it feels to me like, at my level at least, we’ve had apretty clear-eyed, sober assessment of where we’ve made real progress and where we havenot.  
  
On Paris, a lot of the discussion out here both at the G20, APEC, and finally here at ASEAN,has been that we’ve got to get a strong Paris deal.  And I’m optimistic that we can -- 160countries have now put forward their national targets for how they can reduce emissions; thataccounts for about 90 percent of the world’s emitters.  
And the key to a strong agreement is going to be that, although there’s going to bedifferentiation between countries -- the United States doesn't expect that our obligations areidentical to Laos, for example, given our levels of development, how much carbon we emitcompared to theirs -- that everybody does have a plan, that everybody is accountable to asingle set of reporting requirements, that there’s transparency about what each country isdoing -- that once we’ve set that architecture in place, in five years time, we can review whatwe’ve done, turn up the dials in light of additional information and additional technology.  Insome cases, we may make progress faster than we expected, and we can increase ourtargets.  So the key is to make sure that everybody is doing their part.
You raise one important issue, and that is climate finance. There are going to be a number ofcountries who recognize the threat of climate change, want to do something about it, but theyalso have large populations suffering from extreme poverty, who don't have electricity, whodon't have the ability to feed their families.  And any leader of those countries has to askthemselves, am I going to be sacrificing development and poverty alleviation in order to dealwith climate change, particularly since a lot of more developed countries are responsible for atleast the current carbon emissions that are causing climate change.
And so the answer to that we’ve all agreed is a finance mechanism to help these countriesadapt -- in some cases, leapfrog old technologies so that instead of building old, dirty powerplants, here are some smart, clean-energy plants.  And we’ll help you through technologytransfer and financing so that you can achieve your development goals, but not add to thecarbon problem.
So far, with a target of $100 billion, we’ve reached between private and public sources $62billion, and that target did not need to be met until 2020, based on our original commitments. So we're well on our way to meeting these commitments.  And it’s a smart investment for usto make.
Sometimes, back home, critics will argue, there’s no point in us doing something aboutgetting our house in order when it comes to climate change because other countries won’t doanything and it will just mean that we're in a less competitive position. Well, when I met withPresident Xi and China signed on to an aggressive commitment, that took a major argumentaway from those critics.  We now the two largest emitters signed on.  And it makes sense forus and the Chinese and the Europeans and others to help these countries, because,ultimately, if a country like India, for example, with over a billion people, is a major polluter,that's going to affect all of us.  If, on the other hand, they're developing and growing in aclean way, that's going to be good for all of us.
  
I guess you want to know how the atmosphere, as a consequence of the attack in Paris wouldaffect it.  Look, I think it is absolutely vital for every country, every leader to send a signalthat the viciousness of a handful of killers does not stop the world from doing vital business,and that Paris -- one of the most beautiful, enticing cities in the world -- is not going to becowered by the violent, demented actions of a few.  
And that's part of the overall message that I want to very clearly send the American people. We do not succumb to fear.  That's the primary power that these terrorists have over us. They cannot strike a mortal blow against the United States, or against France, or against acountry like Malaysia.  But they can make people fearful.  And that's understandable, becausethat could have been us; that could have been our families; that could have been our childrenin these places.  And our hearts are broken when we see these images.  
But in addition to hunting down terrorists, in addition to effective intelligence, and in additionto missile strikes, and in addition to cutting off financing and all the other things that we'redoing, the most powerful tool we have to fight ISIL is to say that we’re not afraid; to notelevate them; to somehow buy into their fantasy that they’re doing something important. They’re a bunch of killers.  And there have been people throughout human history who canfind an excuse to kill people because they don’t think like them or look like them.  And wefight them, and we beat them, and we don’t change our institutions and our culture and ourvalues because of them.  
I want to be very clear about this.  I am not afraid that ISIL will beat us because of theiroperations.  When I see a headline that says this individual who designed this plot in Paris is amastermind -- he’s not a mastermind.  He found a few other vicious people, got hands onsome fairly conventional weapons, and, sadly, it turns out that if you’re willing to die, you cankill a lot of people.  
And so it is in our capacity to roll up those networks.  Now, we got to take precautions, wehave to take it seriously, and we have to go at the heart of the problem that exists inside ofSyria and Iraq right now.  And we have to address the broader issues that exist in a tinyfraction of the Muslim community.  But it is a real problem that leaders -- from Prime MinisterNajib to the President of Indonesia and others who have large Muslim populations --acknowledge.  A country like Indonesia has 250 million people; if just a tiny fraction of thoseare in some ways attracted by a vicious ideology like ISIL’s, then that’s a real problem for us. And so tools like countering this narrative, and Muslim clerics and political leaders andcommunity leaders coming forward and making sure that our children are not being fed thiskind of bile, that’s critically important as well.  But in all of this, we cannot respond from fear.  And the American people, in the past, haveconfronted some very real, enormous threats, and we beat them.  We vanquished them.  Thiswill be no different.
  
Kevin Corke.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I wanted to ask you about what Secretary Carter saidabout expanding the rules of engagement versus ISIS.  What was that conversation like?  Andwhat did he mean by that? And I’d like to ask you also about immigration.  The high court islooking into executive action on immigration, as you know.  And I understand the sensitivityof it, you don’t want to be prejudicial.  But I’m curious, are you where you thought you’d be inimmigration reform?  And what would you say to family members who say, listen, we did itthe right way, we’ve waited our turn in line -- how do these other guys get to skip the line, ifyou will?  And lastly, the Attorney General announced eight indictments of individuals in theU.S. and Mexico on sex trafficking and related charges.  Where is the fight against sextrafficking among the priorities for your Administration?  Are you where you thought you’d beon that? Thank you, sir.
President Obama:  Okay.  Kevin, you asked all those questions so nicely, but if everybody isasking three questions, we’re not going to get home.  So let me see if I can go through thesevery quickly.
With respect to rules of engagement, we are in a constant conversation inside the SituationRoom about how do we apply force most effectively to go after key ISIL targets, key ISILleaders, strategic positions, their infrastructure, their supply lines, while minimizing civiliancasualties.  We do so for two reasons:  One, because it’s the right thing to do.  There arepeople who are caught up in Mosul right now, for example, who despise ISIL, who areessentially captive to ISIL, are being brutalized by ISIL.  And to the extent that we can avoidthem being killed by those of us who are trying to defeat ISIL, that’s a legitimate concern inany military campaign.  Because if we’re not careful about it -- and this brings us to thepractical element of it -- then you can alienate the very populations that you need to win over,because ultimately those are the folks who are going to have to drive ISIL out, stomp it out allthe way.
The good news is, is the U.S. military has become very good at this.  I think that there havebeen some circumstances where the military proceeds in steps and are continuallyreevaluating whether, well, maybe this is a situation where we can, in fact, take the strikewithout a lot of civilian casualties.  
A good example with the recent trucks that were struck.  There may be ways in whichwarnings can be given to the drivers -- many of whom may not work for ISIL, they may just be for hire or being forced into it -- sothat they better abandon those trucks before we shoot them down, because we’re shootingthem down.  So that’s the kind of conversation, and that’s been ongoing throughout theprocess.
  
With respect to immigration reform, I can’t comment on the ins and outs of the legal case. I’ve said before and I’ll say again, I am confident that the rules and executive action that Iput forward are squarely within the category of prosecutorial discretion that historically hasbeen under a President’s power. And you’ve got lower courts who’ve disagreed, but we thinkthat past precedent is on our side. 
Substantively, I’ve got 11 million people in our countries, many of whom are working, payingtaxes, our neighbors, coworkers, friends who’ve lived in the United States for a very longtime.  We’re not going to deport them, despite what some political leaders may say.  It wouldbe contrary to who we are, would be too costly, is too impractical.  What we want to do isallow them to get out of the shadows and to get right with the law, pay a fine, go to the backof the line, but hopefully, over time, be contributors to society.
Of course, none of this would be necessary if we just passed the legislation that was passed inthe Senate with a bipartisan majority.  And I continue to believe that the ultimate solution isgoing to be one that comes from Congress.  And although, during this political season, it maybe difficult for Republican leaders in either the House or in the Senate to resuscitate thatlegislation, my hope is, is that after the election, they will.  And in the interim, I’m going to doeverything I can to sensibly apply our immigration laws in a way that is reflective of the factthat we're a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.
And just very briefly, with respect to sex trafficking -- this is a critical problem.  We take itvery seriously.  We have entire divisions in our law enforcement agencies that are dedicatedto this.  I’ve elevated this within the White House so that we have people focusing specificallyon ending trafficking. And in our international discussions -- most specifically, out here inSoutheast Asia -- we are working very closely to promote mechanisms that will endtrafficking. 
In fact, TPP, one of the central mechanisms in TPP, to ensure high labor standards and humanrights and human dignity, are requirements among the members who are signatories to havein place real, serious, enforceable ways to prevent the kind of human trafficking that causessuch hardship and brutality for so many people.  
And those of you who were with me when I visited the refugee center yesterday will recall thelovely young 16-year-old who was sitting next to me -- she’s somebody who had been avictim of trafficking.  And it reminds you of the terrible toll that is often placed on children,people who are the most vulnerable, people who are least able to protect themselves.  Andevery country has an obligation to put an end to it.  
David Nakamura.
  
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You said moments ago that Americans should not givein to fear when it comes to these terrorist attacks.  But you also said that the person who mayhave been the person behind thinking about the attacks is not a mastermind and thatanybody who can get their hands on some conventional weapons can -- and is willing to diecan blow themselves up.  How should Americans feel that if they shouldn’t be scared?  And if Imay, The Washington Post and ABC News just this week came out with a poll that said 83percent of the voting public believes that an attack, a terrorist attack against the U.S. withmass casualties is likely to happen in the near future, and 40 percent say it’s very likely. Does that in your mind -- given the fact that you think the public should not be so fearful --mean that the terrorists are winning?  And do you believe that this is sort of the new normal,and Americans will have to live with this kind of fear?
President Obama:  David, I think that the American people are right to be concerned, and toexpect that we in the government and in law enforcement are doing everything we can todisrupt terrorist attacks, to intercept intelligence that may lead us to individuals who arewilling to carry out these attacks, that we make sure that these terrorists are not gaining thekinds of weaponry that would make it easier for them to cause mass attacks.  This is a seriousproblem.  And as somebody who more often than I would like has met with or comfortedfamilies of victims of terrorism, the losses are real and they're devastating.  So this is aserious problem.  And we have to work collectively across the board, as we’ve been doingsince I became President and since previous administrations identified the kinds of organizedterrorist activity like al Qaeda that we’ve seen -- we’ve got to do everything we can to stop it.
But there is a difference between being vigilant and being concerned and taking this seriouslyand taking precautions and, in some cases, changing our security arrangements, as we’vedone, for example, in aviation -- there’s a difference between smart applications of lawenforcement and military and intelligence, and succumbing to the kind of fear that leads us toabandon our values, to abandon how we live, to abandon -- or change how we treat eachother.  
And the good news is, there, Americans actually have been resilient.  They’ve been tested. We had a mass casualty attack on 9/11.  And as I said before, I was very proud of the factthat the fundamental nature of America and how we treated each other did not change.  
I think we made some bad decisions subsequent to that attack in part based on fear, andthat's why we have to be cautious about it.  We have to think things through.  But overall, theAmerican people went about their lives.  Times Square is filled with people -- rightly so.  Afterthe Boston bombing attack, folks went right back to the ballpark and sang, “Take Me Out tothe Ballgame.”  That's what they needed to do.
And so the message I have is that those of us who are charged with protecting the Americanpeople are going to do everything we can to destroy this particular network.
  
Once this network is destroyed -- and it will be -- there may be others that pop up in differentparts of the world, and so we're going to have to continue to take seriously how we maintainthe infrastructure that we’ve built to prevent this.  But it doesn't have to change thefundamental trajectory of the American people. And that we should feel confident about.
And the media needs to help in this.  I just want to say -- during the course of this week, avery difficult week, it is understandable that this has been a primary focus.  But one of thethings that has to happen is how we report on this has to maintain perspective, and notempower in any way these terrorist organizations or elevate them in ways that make it easierfor them to recruit or make them stronger.
They're a bunch of killers with good social media.  And they are dangerous, and they’vecaused great hardship to people.  But the overwhelming majority of people who go about theirbusiness every day, the Americans who are building things, and making things, and teaching,and saving lives as firefighters and as police officers -- they're stronger.  Our way of life isstronger.  We have more to offer -- we represent 99.9 percent of humanity.  And that's whywe should be confident that we’ll win.
Colleen McCain Nelson.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You've threatened to veto the bill the House passedthat would tighten screening procedures for Syrian refugees, but you've left the door open tolegislation that is more constructive in the White House’s view.  
President Obama:  Yes.
Question: What specific changes to your refugee program would you support?  And do youthink that Democrats who are calling for a halt to your program are betraying our country’svalues, as you've suggested of some Republicans? And one last thing -- I’m sorry --separately.  Not a four-part question.  
President Obama:  Just a two-parter.  Okay, go ahead.
Question:  You met Friday with Prime Minister Najib, who is facing allegations of corruptionand human rights violations.  And you’d said at your town hall event that you would raisethose issues with him when you spoke privately.  What was your message to Najib about theinvestments funds scandal and also about the issue of jailing his political opponents? 
President Obama:  Okay.  With respect to the refugee program, Paris just happened a weekago.  News moves so fast these days that sometimes we just lose track.  It’s been so recentand so pervasive in the news, and people have, understandably, been so concerned given howsimilar Paris is to many American cities that I get why legislation in the House moved forwardquickly.  
  
My hope, though, is, is that now that we’ve got some time to catch our breath and take a lookat this carefully, people understand that refugees who end up in the United States are themost vetted, scrutinized, thoroughly investigated individuals that ever arrive on Americanshores; that the process that's been constructed over the course of several administrations ona bipartisan basis is extraordinarily thorough and currently takes between 18 to 24 months forsomebody to be approved.  
And so although, on its face, the House legislation simply says, well, we can just certify -- andthis is not along the lines of some of the more radical proposals that we were hearing earlierin the week from some presidential candidates -- the fact of the matter is, is that if it gums upthe work so much, then effectively you don’t end up seeing any refugees admitted.  If youlayer it with more and more bureaucracy, that doesn’t actually make us safer because itdoesn’t do a better job of screening but simply makes it almost impossible to processindividuals who are coming in, then you’re effectively ending the refugee program for peoplewho desperately need it.
And when I referred to a betrayal of our values, I was being very specific about some of thecommentary that was made that would suggest, for example, that we might let Christians inbut not Muslims; that we -- somehow we’re so fearful that a four-year-old orphan might be letin.  And those of you who joined me to the refugee center yesterday and you saw those kids,that’s who we’re talking about.  If you are a parent and you saw those kids, and you thoughtabout what they had gone through, the notion that we couldn’t find a home for themanywhere in the United States of America, that is contrary to our values. 
And the good news is, is that the overwhelming majority of the people who know that we arescreening and all the precautions that are already taken -- if they saw those kids, they’d say,yeah, we need to do right by those children.
So with respect to Prime Minister Najib, I don’t comment on investigations happening back inthe United States; I certainly am not going to comment on any investigations or legalproceedings that may be taking place in a foreign country where I’m a visitor.  But I did raisewith Prime Minister Najib -- as I have with many of the leaders here in Southeast Asia, butalso many leaders in Africa and Latin America and everywhere we go -- the importance oftransparency, accountability, the importance of rooting out corruption -- all of which areimpediments to development; all of which hold countries back; all of which contribute topoverty and stunted growth.
And if countries solve those problems, even if they are resource-poor and landlocked, they willdo better.  And if they don’t solve those problems, it doesn’t matter how much they’re blessedby natural resources, or size, or geography -- they’re going to fail.
  
And I also emphasized to Prime Minister Najib the importance of civil society and a free pressin countries thriving.  And every country here is at different levels and stages of development,both social and economic, and we don’t expect that everybody follows the same path that theUnited States does.  But I do think there are some basic principles that are important for us touphold as friends and partners to the countries that we’re talking to.
The good news is, is that -- take a country like Myanmar, that just went through a historicelection after having been subject for 40 years to military rule.  They’re not going toimmediately be Sweden in terms of their democratic practices, but there is a sea changetaking place there, and we want to encourage that and engage it.  
And a lot of the work that we do -- the Open Government Partnership that we set up throughUnited Nations, the bilateral work we do in terms of improving transparency, the principlesand rules that we’ve embedded in TPP -- all those things are designed to raise the bar, tohave people set sights that are a little bit higher.  And some will go forward, some will slipback.  Paces will vary, but the trajectory is the same -- and that is a world where ordinarypeople are treated fairly, there’s rule of law, there’s transparency, governments areaccountable, people’s voices are heard, women are treated equally, minorities are notdiscriminated against.  
Those are profoundly American values, but I also think they are universal values.
All right.  Thank you, everybody.  Let’s go home.
