First, I'd like to say a few words about the situation in Iran. The United States and theinternational community have been appalled and outraged by the threats, the beatings, andimprisonments of the last few days. I strongly condemn these unjust actions, and I join withthe American people in mourning each and every innocent life that is lost.
I've made it clear that the United States respects the sovereignty of the Islamic Republic ofIran, and is not interfering with Iran's affairs. But we must also bear witness to the courageand the dignity of the Iranian people, and to a remarkable opening within Iranian society. Andwe deplore the violence against innocent civilians anywhere that it takes place.
The Iranian people are trying to have a debate about their future. Some in Iran -- some in theIranian government, in particular, are trying to avoid that debate by accusing the UnitedStates and others in the West of instigating protests over the election. These accusations arepatently false. They're an obvious attempt to distract people from what is truly taking placewithin Iran's borders. This tired strategy of using old tensions to scapegoat other countrieswon't work anymore in Iran. This is not about the United States or the West; this is about thepeople of Iran, and the future that they -- and only they -- will choose.
The Iranian people can speak for themselves. That's precisely what's happened in the last fewdays. In 2009, no iron fist is strong enough to shut off the world from bearing witness topeaceful protests of justice. Despite the Iranian government's efforts to expel journalists andisolate itself, powerful images and poignant words have made their way to us through cellphones and computers, and so we've watched what the Iranian people are doing.

This is what we've witnessed. We've seen the timeless dignity of tens of thousands of Iraniansmarching in silence. We've seen people of all ages risk everything to insist that their votes arecounted and that their voices are heard. Above all, we've seen courageous women stand up tothe brutality and threats, and we've experienced the searing image of a woman bleeding todeath on the streets. While this loss is raw and extraordinarily painful, we also know this:Those who stand up for justice are always on the right side of history.
As I said in Cairo, suppressing ideas never succeeds in making them go away. The Iranianpeople have a universal right to assembly and free speech. If the Iranian government seeksthe respect of the international community, it must respect those rights and heed the will ofits own people. It must govern through consent and not coercion. That's what Iran's ownpeople are calling for, and the Iranian people will ultimately judge the actions of their owngovernment.
Now, the second issue I want to address is our ongoing effort to build a clean energyeconomy.
This week, the House of Representatives is moving ahead on historic legislation that willtransform the way we produce and use energy in America. This legislation will spark a cleanenergy transformation that will reduce our dependence on foreign oil and confront the carbonpollution that threatens our planet.
This energy bill will create a set of incentives that will spur the development of new sources ofenergy, including wind, solar, and geothermal power. It will also spur new energy savings, likeefficient windows and other materials that reduce heating costs in the winter and cooling costsin the summer.
These incentives will finally make clean energy the profitable kind of energy. And that will leadto the development of new technologies that lead to new industries that could create millionsof new jobs in America -- jobs that can't be shipped overseas.
At a time of great fiscal challenges, this legislation is paid for by the polluters who currentlyemit the dangerous carbon emissions that contaminate the water we drink and pollute the airthat we breathe. It also provides assistance to businesses and communities as they make thegradual transition to clean energy technologies.
So I believe that this legislation is extraordinarily important for our country; it's taken greateffort on the part of many over the course of the past several months. And I want to thankthe Chair of the Energy and Commerce Committee, Henry Waxman; his colleagues on thatcommittee, including Congressmen Dingell, Ed Markey, and Rick Boucher. I also want to thankCharlie Rangel, the Chair of the Ways and Means Committee, and Collin Peterson, the Chair ofthe Agriculture Committee, for their many and ongoing contributions to this process. And Iwant to express my appreciation to Nancy Pelosi and Steny Hoyer for their leadership.

We all know why this is so important. The nation that leads in the creation of a clean energyeconomy will be the nation that leads the 21st century's global economy. That's what thislegislation seeks to achieve -- it's a bill that will open the door to a better future for thisnation. And that's why I urge members of Congress to come together and pass it.
The last issue I'd like to address is health care.
Right now, Congress is debating various health care reform proposals. This is obviously acomplicated issue, but I am very optimistic about the progress that they're making.
Like energy, this is legislation that must and will be paid for. It will not add to our deficits overthe next decade. We will find the money through savings and efficiencies within the healthcare system -- some of which we've already announced.
We will also ensure that the reform we pass brings down the crushing cost of health care. Wesimply can't have a system where we throw good money after bad habits. We need to controlthe skyrocketing costs that are driving families, businesses, and our government into greaterand greater debt.
There's no doubt that we must preserve what's best about our health care system, and thatmeans allowing Americans who like their doctors and their health care plans to keep them.But unless we fix what's broken in our current system, everyone's health care will be injeopardy. Unless we act, premiums will climb higher, benefits will erode further, and the rollsof the uninsured will swell to include millions more Americans. Unless we act, one out of everyfive dollars that we earn will be spent on health care within a decade. And the amount ourgovernment spends on Medicare and Medicaid will eventually grow larger than what ourgovernment spends on everything else today.
When it comes to health care, the status Q: uo is unsustainable and unacceptable. So reformis not a luxury, it's a necessity. And I hope that Congress will continue to make significantprogress on this issue in the weeks ahead.
So let me open it up for questions, and I'll start with you, Jennifer.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Your administration has said that the offer to talk to Iran'sleaders remains open. Can you say if that's still so, even with all the violence that has beencommitted by the government against the peaceful protesters? And if it is, is there any redline that your administration won't cross where that offer will be shut off?
President Obama: Well, obviously what's happened in Iran is profound. And we're stillwaiting to see how it plays itself out. My position coming into this office has been that theUnited States has core national security interests in making sure that Iran doesn't possess anuclear weapon and it stops exporting terrorism outside of its borders.

We have provided a path whereby Iran can reach out to the international community, engage,and become a part of international norms. It is up to them to make a decision as to whetherthey choose that path. What we've been seeing over the last several days, the last couple ofweeks, obviously is not encouraging, in terms of the path that this regime may choose totake. And the fact that they are now in the midst of an extraordinary debate taking place inIran may end up coloring how they respond to the international community as a whole.
We are going to monitor and see how this plays itself out before we make any judgmentsabout how we proceed. But just to reiterate, there is a path available to Iran in which theirsovereignty is respected, their traditions, their culture, their faith is respected, but one inwhich they are part of a larger community that has responsibilities and operates according tonorms and international rules that are universal. We don't know how they're going to respondyet, and that's what we're waiting to see.
Q: So should there be consequences for what's happened so far?
President Obama: I think that the international community is, as I said before, bearingwitness to what's taking place. And the Iranian government should understand that how theyhandle the dissent within their own country, generated indigenously, internally, from theIranian people, will help shape the tone not only for Iran's future but also its relationship toother countries.
Since we're on Iran, I know Nico Pitney is here from Huffington Post.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President.
President Obama: Nico, I know that you, and all across the Internet, we've been seeing a lotof reports coming directly out of Iran. I know that there may actually be Questions frompeople in Iran who are communicating through the Internet. Do you have a question?
Q: Yes, I did, I wanted to use this opportunity to ask you a question directly from an Iranian.We solicited questions last night from people who are still courageous enough to becommunicating online, and one of them wanted to ask you this: Under which conditions wouldyou accept the election of Ahmadinejad? And if you do accept it without any significantchanges in the conditions there, isn't that a betrayal of what the demonstrators there areworking towards?
President Obama: Well, look, we didn't have international observers on the ground. Wecan't say definitively what exactly happened at polling places throughout the country. Whatwe know is that a sizeable percentage of the Iranian people themselves, spanning Iraniansociety, consider this election illegitimate. It's not an isolated instance -- a little grumblinghere or there. There is significant questions about the legitimacy of the election.

And so ultimately the most important thing for the Iranian government to consider islegitimacy in the eyes of its own people, not in the eyes of the United States. And that's whyI've been very clear: Ultimately, this is up to the Iranian people to decide who their leadershipis going to be and the structure of their government.
What we can do is to say unequivocally that there are sets of international norms andprinciples about violence, about dealing with peaceful dissent, that spans cultures, spansborders. And what we've been seeing over the Internet and what we've been seeing in newsreports violates those norms and violates those principles.
I think it is not too late for the Iranian government to recognize that there is a peaceful paththat will lead to stability and legitimacy and prosperity for the Iranian people. We hope theytake it.
Jeff Mason of Reuters.
Q: Right here, sir. Switching gears slightly, in light of the financial regulation and reform thatyou have made, how do you rate the performance of the Fed in handling the financial crisis?And more specifically, how do you rate the performance of Ben Bernanke, and would you likehim to stay on when his term ends in January?
President Obama: I'm not going to make news about Ben Bernanke -- although I think hehas done a fine job under very difficult circumstances.
I would say that all financial regulators didn't do everything that needed to be done to preventthe crisis from happening. And that's why we've put forward the boldest set of reforms infinancial regulation in 75 years, because there were too many gaps where there were laws onthe books that would have brought about a prevention of the crisis; the enforcement wasn'tthere. In some cases, there just weren't sufficient laws on the books -- for example, with thenon-banking sector.
I think that the Fed probably performed better than most other regulators prior to the crisistaking place, but I think they'd be the first to acknowledge that in dealing with systemic riskand anticipating systemic risk, they didn't do everything that needed to be done.
I think since the crisis has occurred, Ben Bernanke has performed very well. And one of thecentral concepts behind our financial regulatory reform is that there's got to be somebody whois responsible not just for monitoring the health of individual institutions, but somebody who'smonitoring the systemic risks of the system as a whole. And we believe that the Fed has themost technical expertise and the best track record in terms of doing that.

But that's not the only part of financial regulation. One of the things that we're putting a hugeamount of emphasis on is the issue of consumer protection -- whether it's subprime loans thatwere given out because nobody was paying attention to what was being peddled toconsumers, whether it's how credit cards are handled, how annuities are dealt with, whatpeople can expect in terms of understanding their 401(k)s. There's a whole bunch of financialtransactions out there where consumers are not protected the way they should, and that'swhy we said we're going to put forward a consumer financial protection agency whose onlyjob it is to focus on those issues.
Now, the Fed was one of the regulators that had some of those consumer responsibilities. Weactually think that they're better off focusing on issues of broad systemic risk, and we havejust one agency that's focused on the consumer protection side.
Q: But is the Fed getting too powerful?
President Obama: If you look at what we've proposed, we are not so much expanding theFed's power as we are focusing what the Fed needs to do to prevent the kinds of crises thatare happening again. Another good example is the issue of resolution authority. I think itwasn't that long ago where everybody was properly outraged about AIG, and the enormousamounts of money the taxpayers had to put into AIG in order to prevent it from dragging theentire financial system down with it.
Had we had the kinds of resolution authority, the kinds of laws that were in place that wouldallow a orderly winding down of AIG, then potentially taxpayers could have saved a hugeamount of money. We want that power to be available so that taxpayers aren't on the hook.
All right? Major Garrett. Where's Major?
Q: Right here, sir. In your opening remarks, sir, you were -- you said about Iran that youwere appalled and outraged. What took you so long to say those words?
President Obama: I don't think that's accurate. Track what I've been saying. Right after theelection, I said that we had profound concerns about the nature of the election, but that it wasnot up to us to determine what the outcome was. As soon as violence broke out -- in fact, inanticipation of potential violence -- we were very clear in saying that violence wasunacceptable, that that was not how governments operate with respect to their people.
So we've been entirely consistent, Major, in terms of how we've approached this. My role hasbeen to say the United States is not going to be a foil for the Iranian government to try toblame what's happening on the streets of Tehran on the CIA or on the White House; that thisis an issue that is led by and given voice to the frustrations of the Iranian people. And sowe've been very consistent the first day, and we're going to continue to be consistent insaying this is not an issue about the United States; this is about an issue of the Iranianpeople.

What we've also been consistent about is saying that there are some universal principles,including freedom of assembly and freedom of speech, making sure that governments are notusing coercion and violence and repression in terms of how they interact with peacefuldemonstrators. And we have been speaking out very clearly about that fact.
Q: Are Iranian diplomats still welcome at the embassy on the Fourth of July, sir?
President Obama: Well, I think as you're aware, Major, we don't have formal diplomaticrelations with -- we don't have formal diplomatic relations with Iran. I think that we have saidthat if Iran chooses a path that abides by international norms and principles, then we areinterested in healing some of the wounds of 30 years, in terms of U.S.-Iranian relations. Butthat is a choice that the Iranians are going to have to make.
Q: But the offer still stands?
President Obama: That's a choice the Iranians are going to have to make.
David Jackson.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Two of the key players in the insurance industry, America'sHealth Insurance Plans and Blue Cross-Blue Shield, sent a letter to the Senate this morningsaying that a government health insurance plan would "dismantle" private insurers. Why arethey wrong? And secondly, this public plan, is this non-negotiable? Would you sign a healthcare bill without it?
President Obama: Well, let's talk first of all about health care reform more broadly.
I think in this debate there's been some notion that if we just stand pat we're okay. And that'sjust not true. You know, there are polls out that show that 70 or 80 percent of Americans aresatisfied with the health insurance that they currently have. The only problem is thatpremiums have been doubling every nine years, going up three times faster than wages. TheU.S. government is not going to be able to afford Medicare and Medicaid on its currenttrajectory. Businesses are having to make very tough decisions about whether we dropcoverage or we further restrict coverage.
So the notion that somehow we can just keep on doing what we're doing and that's okay,that's just not true. We have a longstanding critical problem in our health care system that ispulling down our economy, it's burdening families, it's burdening businesses, and it is theprimary driver of our federal deficits. All right?

So if we start from the premise that the status Q: uo is unacceptable, then that means we'regoing to have to bring about some serious changes. What I've said is, our top priority has tobe to control costs. And that means not just tinkering around the edges. It doesn't mean justlopping off reimbursements for doctors in any given year because we're trying to fix ourbudget. It means that we look at the kinds of incentives that exist, what our delivery systemis like, why it is that some communities are spending 30 percent less than other communitiesbut getting better health care outcomes, and figuring out how can we make sure thateverybody is benefiting from lower costs and better quality by improving practices. It meanshealth IT. It means prevention.
So all these things are the starting point, I think, for reform. And I've said very clearly: If anybill arrives from Congress that is not controlling costs, that's not a bill I can support. It's goingto have to control costs. It's going to have to be paid for. So there's been a lot of talk about,well, a trillion-dollar price tag. What I've said is, if we're going to spend that much money,then it's going to be largely funded through reallocating dollars that are already in the healthcare system but aren't being spent well. If we're spending $177 billion over 10 years tosubsidize insurance companies under Medicare Advantage, when there's no showing thatpeople are healthier using that program than the regular Medicare program, well, that's not agood deal for taxpayers. And we're going to take that money and we're going to use it toprovide better care at a cheaper cost to the American people. So that's point number one.
Number two, while we are in the process of dealing with the cost issue, I think it's also wisepolicy and the right thing to do to start providing coverage for people who don't have healthinsurance or are underinsured, are paying a lot of money for high deductibles. I get letters --two, three letters a day -- that I read of families who don't have health insurance, are goingbankrupt, are on the brink of losing their insurance; have deductibles that are so high thateven with insurance they end up with $50,000, $100,000 worth of debt; are at risk of losingtheir homes.
And that has to be part of reform, making sure that even if you've got health insurance now,you are not worried that when you lose your job or your employer decides to change policiesthat somehow you're going to be out of luck. I think about the woman who was in Wisconsinthat I was with, who introduced me up in Green Bay -- 36 years old, double mastectomy;breast cancer has now moved to her bones and she's got two little kids, a husband with a job.They had health insurance, but they're still $50,000 in debt, and she's thinking, my mainlegacy, if I don't survive this thing, is going to be leaving $100,000 worth of debt. So thoseare the things that I'm prioritizing.
Now, the public plan I think is a important tool to discipline insurance companies. What we'vesaid is, under our proposal, let's have a system the same way that federal employees do,same way that members of Congress do, where -- we call it an "exchange," or you can call ita "marketplace" -- where essentially you've got a whole bunch of different plans.

If you like your plan and you like your doctor, you won't have to do a thing. You keep yourplan. You keep your doctor. If your employer is providing you good health insurance, terrific,we're not going to mess with it.
But if you're a small business person, if the insurance that's being offered is something youcan't afford, if you want to shop for a better price, then you can go to this exchange, thismarketplace, and you can look: Okay, this is how much this plan costs, this is how much thatplan costs, this is what the coverage is like, this is what fits for my family. As one of thoseoptions, for us to be able to say, here's a public option that's not profit-driven, that can keepdown administrative costs and that provides you good, quality care for a reasonable price --as one of the options for you to choose, I think that makes sense.
Q: Won't that drive private insurers out of business?
President Obama: Why would it drive private insurers out of business? If private insurerssay that the marketplace provides the best quality health care, if they tell us that they'reoffering a good deal, then why is it that the government -- which they say can't run anything -
- suddenly is going to drive them out of business? That's not logical.
Now, I think that there's going to be some healthy debates in Congress about the shape thatthis takes. I think there can be some legitimate concerns on the part of private insurers that ifany public plan is simply being subsidized by taxpayers endlessly, that over time they can'tcompete with the government just printing money.
So there are going to be some I think legitimate debates to be had about how this privateplan takes shape. But just conceptually, the notion that all these insurance companies whosay they're giving consumers the best possible deal, that they can't compete against a publicplan as one option, with consumers making the decision what's the best deal. That defieslogic, which is why I think you've seen in the polling data overwhelming support for a publicplan. All right?
Q: Is that non-negotiable?
President Obama: Chip.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Following up on Major's question, some republicans on CapitolHill -- John McCain and Lindsey Graham, for example -- have said that up to this point, yourresponse on Iran has been timid and weak. Today, it sounded a lot stronger. It sounded likethe kind of speech John McCain has been urging you to give, saying that those who stand upfor justice are always on the right side of history, referring to an iron fist in Iran -- "deplore,""appalled," "outraged." Were you influenced at all by John McCain and Lindsey Grahamaccusing you of being timid and weak?

President Obama: What do you think? Look, the -- I think John McCain has genuine passionabout many of these international issues, and I think that all of us share a belief that we wantjustice to prevail. But only I'm the President of the United States, and I've got responsibilitiesin making certain that we are continually advancing our national security interests and that weare not used as a tool to be exploited by other countries.
I mean, you guys must have seen the reports. They've got some of the comments that I'vemade being mistranslated in Iran, suggesting that I'm telling rioters to go out and riot somemore. There are reports suggesting that the CIA is behind all this -- all of which are patentlyfalse. But it gives you a sense of the narrative that the Iranian government would love to playinto. So the -- members of Congress, they've got their constitutional duties, and I'm sure theywill carry them out in the way that they think is appropriate. I'm President of the UnitedStates, and I'll carry out my duties as I think are appropriate. All right?
Q: By speaking so strongly today, aren't you giving the leadership in Iran the fodder to makethose arguments that it is about the United States?
President Obama: Look, I mean, I think that -- we can parse this as much as we want. Ithink if you look at the statements that I've made, they've been very consistent. I just made astatement on Saturday in which we said we deplore the violence. And so I think that in thehothouse of Washington, there may be all kinds of stuff going back and forth in terms ofRepublican critics versus the administration. That's not what is relevant to the Iranian people.What's relevant to them right now is, are they going to have their voices heard?
And, frankly, a lot of them aren't paying a lot of attention to what's being said on Capitol Hill,and probably aren't spending a lot of time thinking about what's being said here. They'retrying to figure out how can they make sure justice is served in Iran.
Q: So there's no news in your statement today?
President Obama: Chuck Todd.
Q: Mr. President, I want to follow up on Iran. You have avoided twice spelling outconsequences. You've hinted that there would be, from the international community, if theycontinue to violate -- you said violate these norms. You seem to hint that there are humanrights violations taking place./
President Obama: I'm not hinting. I think that when a young woman gets shot on the streetwhen she gets out of her car, that's a problem.
Q: Then why won't you spell out the consequences that the Iranian --

President Obama: Because I think, Chuck, that we don't know yet how this thing is going toplay out. I know everybody here is on a 24-hour news cycle. I'm not.
Q: But shouldn't -- I mean, shouldn't the world and Iran --
President Obama: Chuck, I answered --
Q: -- but shouldn't the Iranian regime know that there are consequences?
President Obama: I answered the question, Chuck, which is that we don't yet know how thisis going to play out.
Jake Tapper.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Before I ask my question, I'm wondering if you could actuallyanswer David's. Is the public plan non-negotiable?
President Obama: That's your question.
Q: Well, you didn't answer --
President Obama: You think you're going to -- are you the ombudsman for the White Housepress corps? What's your -- is that your question?
Q: Then I have a two-part question. Is the public plan non-negotiable? And while I appreciateyour Spock-like language about the logic of the health care plan, the public plan, it does seemlogical to a lot of people that if the government is offering a cheaper health care plan, thenlots of employers will want to have their employees covered by that cheaper plan, which willnot have to be for profit, unlike private plans, and may possibly benefit from somegovernment subsidies, who knows. And then their employees would be signed up for thispublic plan, which would violate what you're promising the American people, that they will nothave to change health care plans if they like the plan they have.
President Obama: I got you. You're pitching, I'm catching. I got the question. First of all,was the reference to Spock -- is that a crack on my ears? All right, I just want to make sure.No?
Q: I would never make fun of your ears, sir.
President Obama: In answer to David's question, which you co-opted, we are still early inthis process, so we have not drawn lines in the sand other than that reform has to controlcosts and that it has to provide relief to people who don't have health insurance or areunderinsured. Those are the broad parameters that we've discussed.

There are a whole host of other issues where ultimately I may have a strong opinion, and Iwill express those to members of Congress as this is shaping up. It's too early to say that.Right now I will say that our position is that a public plan makes sense.
Now, let me go to the broader question you made about the public plan. As I said before, Ithink that there is a legitimate concern if the public plan was simply eating off the taxpayertrough, that it would be hard for private insurers to complete. If, on the other hand, the publicplan is structured in such a way where they've got to collect premiums and they've got toprovide good services, then if what the insurance companies are saying is true, that they'redoing their best to serve their customers, that they're in the business of keeping people welland giving them security when they get sick, they should be able to compete.
Now, if it turns out that the public plan, for example, is able to reduce administrative costssignificantly, then you know what? I'd like insurance companies to take note and say, hey, ifthe public plan can do that, why can't we? And that's good for everybody in the system. And Idon't think there should be any objection to that.
Now, by the way, I should point out that part of the reform that we've suggested is that if youwant to be a private insurer as part of the exchange, as part of this marketplace, this menu ofoptions that people can choose from, we're going to have some different rules for allinsurance companies -- one of them being that you can't preclude people from getting healthinsurance because of a pre-existing condition, you can't cherry pick and just take thehealthiest people.
So there are going to be some ground rules that are going to apply to all insurancecompanies, because I think the American people understand that, too often, insurancecompanies have been spending more time thinking about how to take premiums and thenavoid providing people coverage than they have been thinking about how can we make surethat insurance is there, health care is there when families need it.
But I'm confident that if -- I take those advocates of the free market to heart when they saythat the free market is innovative and is going to compete on service and is going to competeon their ability to deliver good care to families. And if that's the case then this just becomesone more option. If it's not the case then I think that that's something that the Americanpeople should know.
Q: I'm sorry, but what about keeping your promise to the American people that they won'thave to change plans even if employers --
President Obama: Well, no, no, I mean -- when I say if you have your plan and you like itand your doctor has a plan, or you have a doctor and you like your doctor that you don't haveto change plans, what I'm saying is the government is not going to make you change plansunder health reform.

Now, are there going to be employers right now -- assuming we don't do anything -- let's saythat we take the advice of some folks who are out there and say, oh, this is not the time to dohealth care, we can't afford it, it's too complicated, let's take our time, et cetera. So let'sassume that nothing happened. I can guarantee you that there's a possibility for a whole lot ofAmericans out there that they're not going to end up having the same health care they have,because what's going to happen is, as costs keep on going up, employers are going to startmaking decisions: We've got to raise premiums on our employees; in some cases, we can'tprovide health insurance at all.
And so there are going to be a whole set of changes out there. That's exactly why healthreform is so important.
Margaret, from McClatchy. Where's Margaret? There you are.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President. As a former smoker, I understand the frustration and the fearthat comes with quitting. But with the new law that you signed yesterday regulating thetobacco industry, I'd like to ask you a few questions. How many cigarettes a day --
President Obama: A few questions?
Q: How many cigarettes a day do you now smoke? Do you smoke alone or in the presence ofother people? And do you believe the new law would help you to Q: uit? If so, why?
President Obama: Well, first of all, the new law that was put in place is not about me, it'sabout the next generation of kids coming up. So I think it's fair, Margaret, to just say that youjust think it's neat to ask me about my smoking, as opposed to it being relevant to my newlaw. But that's fine, I understand. It's an interesting human -- it's an interesting humaninterest story.
But I've said before that, as a former smoker, I constantly struggle with it. Have I fallen offthe wagon sometimes? Yes. Am I a daily smoker, a constant smoker? No. I don't do it in frontof my kids, I don't do it in front of my family, and I would say that I am 95 percent cured, butthere are times where -- there are times where I mess up. And, I mean, I've said this before.I get this question about once every month or so, and I don't know what to tell you, otherthan the fact that, like folks who go to AA, once you've gone down this path, then it'ssomething you continually struggle with, which is precisely why the legislation we signed wasso important, because what we don't want is kids going down that path in the first place.Okay?
Macarena Vidal?

Q: Mr. President, you're meeting today with Chilean President Michelle Bachelet. You'remeeting next week with Alvaro Uribe from Colombia. Two months ago in Trinidad at theSummit of the Americas, you said that -- you called on Latin American countries to help youwith deeds, not words, particularly towards less democratic countries. Have you noticed anyparticular progress in these two months, and can you give us examples?
President Obama: Well, first of all, I'm very much looking forward to seeing PresidentBachelet. I think she's one of the finest leaders in Latin America, a very capable person. If youlook at how Chile has handled the recession, they've handled it very well in part because thesurpluses that they got when copper prices were high they set aside. And so they had theresources to deal with the downturn. It's a good lesson for the United States. When we hadsurpluses, they got dissipated.
We think that there's enormous possibilities of making progress in Latin America generally.One of the things that I'll be talking about with President Bachelet is the coordination andcooperation between the United State and Chile on clean energy. We'll have an announcementwhen we do our press conference after my bilateral meeting on some important clean energypartnerships. We're making important progress when it comes to exchanges on cancerresearch. We continue to have a robust trade regime with Chile. And, by the way, Chile hasactually entered into some very interesting partnerships not just with the federal government,but also with state governments like California.
So I think the relationship that we have with Chile -- which, by the way, does not fall in linewith U.S. foreign policy on every single issue -- but it's a respectful policy. Chile is animportant partner. I think that's the model that we want: partnership. The United Statesdoesn't dictate how Chile should view its own interests, but in fact we've achieved greatcooperation. And I will be looking at President Bachelet giving us further advice in terms ofhow we can take the kind of relationship we have with Chile and expand that to ourrelationships throughout Latin America.
Q: But my question is not only about that -- Chile, but about Latin American countries givingyou a hand on -- against less democratic countries.
President Obama: Well, the point is, is that I think Chile is leading by example. So I'm usingChile as an example. But the same is true in Brazil, for example. I mean, President Lula camein, and he's got a very different political orientation than most Americans do. He came upthrough the trade union movement. He was perceived as a strong leftist. It turns out that hewas a very practical person, who although maintains relationships across the politicalspectrum in Latin America, has instituted all sorts of smart market reforms that have madeBrazil prosper.

And so if you take a Bachelet or a Lula, and the United States has a good working relationshipwith them, then I think that points the way for other countries that may be where thedemocratic tradition is not as deeply embedded as we'd like it to be. And we can makecommon cause in showing those countries that, in fact, democracy, respect for propertyrights, respects for market-based economies, rule of law -- that all those things can in factlead to greater prosperity, that that's not just a U.S. agenda, but that's a smart way toincrease the prosperity of your own people.
Okay, Hans Nichols. Hans.
Q: Thank you, Mr. President. If I can just return to the economy more generally. When youwere selling the economic stimulus package, you talked and your advisors and economiststalked about keeping unemployment below 8 percent. Last week you acknowledged thatunemployment is likely to reach double digits, being 10 percent. Do you think you need asecond stimulus package?
President Obama: Well, not yet, because I think it's important to see how the economyevolves and how effective the first stimulus is. I think it's fair to say that -- keep in mind thestimulus package was the first thing we did, and we did it a couple of weeks afterinauguration. At that point nobody understood what the depths of this recession were going tolook like. If you recall, it was only significantly later that we suddenly get a report that theeconomy had tanked.
And so it's not surprising then that we missed the mark in terms of our estimates of whereunemployment would go. I think it's pretty clear now that unemployment will end up goingover 10 percent, if you just look at the pattern, because of the fact that even after employersand businesses start investing again and start hiring again, typically it takes a while for thatemployment number to catch up with economic recovery. And we're still not at actualrecovery yet.
So I anticipate that this is going to be a difficult -- difficult year, a difficult period.
Q: What's the high water mark, then, for unemployment? Eleven percent?
President Obama: Well, I'm not suggesting that I have a crystal ball. Since you just threwback at us our last prognosis, let's not -- let's not engage in another one.
Q: Does that mean you won't be making predictions ever?
President Obama: But what I am saying is that -- here are some things I know for certain.In the absence of the stimulus, I think our recession would be much worse. It would havedeclined -- without the Recovery Act -- we know for a fact that states, for example, wouldhave laid off a lot more teachers, a lot more police officers, a lot more firefighters, everysingle one of those individuals whose jobs were saved.

As a consequence, they are still making their mortgage payments, they are still shopping. Sowe know that the Recovery Act has had an impact.
Now, what we also know is this was the worst recession since the Great Depression, andpeople are going through a very tough time right now. And I don't expect them to be satisfied.I mean, one thing that -- as I sometimes glance at the various news outlets represented here,I know that they're sometimes reporting of, oh, the administration is worried about this, ortheir poll numbers are going down there -- look, the American people have a right to feel likethis is a tough time right now. What's incredible to me is how resilient the American peoplehave been and how they are still more optimistic than the facts alone would justify, becausethis is a tough, tough period.
And I don't feel satisfied with the progress that we've made. We've got to get our RecoveryAct money out faster. We've got to make sure that the programs that we've put in place areworking the way they're supposed to. I think, for example, our mortgage program hasactually helped to modify mortgages for a lot of people, but it hasn't been keeping pace withall the foreclosures that are taking place. I get letters every day from people who say, youknow, I appreciate that you put out this mortgage program, but the bank is still not letting memodify my mortgage and I'm about to lose my home. And then I've got to call my staff andteam and find out why isn't it working for these folks, and can we adjust it, can we tweak it,can we make it more aggressive?
This is a very, very difficult process. And what I've got to do is to make sure that we'refocused both on the short term, how can we provide families immediate relief and jumpstartthe economy as quickly as possible; and I've got to keep my eye on the long term, and thelong term is making sure that by reforming our health care system, by passing serious energylegislation that makes us a clean energy economy, by revamping our education system, byfinally getting the financial regulatory reforms in place that are necessary for the 21st century-- by doing all those things, we've got a foundation for long-term economic growth, and wedon't end up having to juice up the economy artificially through the kinds of bubble strategiesthat helped to get us in the situation that we're in today.
Okay. I've got time for two more questions. April. Where's April?
Q: Right here.
President Obama: There you are. How are you?
Q: I'm fine. Back on the economy, Mr. President, people are criticizing this road to recoveryplan. Specifically, there are reports in The Washington Post that say that the African Americaunemployment rate will go to 20 percent by the end of this year. And then you had yourChairman of Economic Advisers say the target intervention may come next year if nothingchanges. Why not target intervention now to stop the bloodletting in the black unemploymentrate?

President Obama: Look, first of all, we know that the African American unemployment rate,the Latino unemployment rate, are consistently higher than the national average. And so, ifthe economy as a whole is doing poorly, then you know that the African American communityis going to be doing poorly, and they're going to be hit even harder. And the best thing that Ican do for the African American community or the Latino community or the Asian community,whatever community, is to get the economy as a whole moving. If I don't -- hold on onesecond, let me answer the question -- if I don't do that, then I'm not going to be able to helpanybody. So that's priority number one.
It is true that in certain inner-city communities, the unemployment rate is -- was already skyhigh even before this recession. The ladders available for people to enter into the job marketare even worse. And so we are interested in looking at proven programs that help people on apathway to jobs.
There was a reason why right before Father's Day I went to a program here locally inWashington called Year Up, which has a proven track record of taking young, mostly minoritypeople, some of whom have graduated from high school, some maybe who've just gottentheir GED, and trained them on computers and provide them other technical skills, but alsotrain them on how to carry themselves in an office, how to write an e-mail -- some of thesocial skills that will allow them to be more employable. They've got a terrific placement rateafter this one-year program. If there are ways that we can potentially duplicate some of thoseprograms, then we're going to do so.
So part of what we want to do is to find tools that will give people more opportunity, but themost important thing I can do is to lift the economy overall. And that's what my strategy isfocused on.
All right. Last Question. Suzanne.
Q: Thank you. Back to Iran, putting a human face on this. Over the weekend, we saw ashocking video of this woman, Neda, who had been shot in the chest and bled to death. Haveyou seen this video?
President Obama: I have.
Q: What's your reaction?
President Obama: It's heartbreaking. It's heartbreaking. And I think that anybody who seesit knows that there's something fundamentally unjust about that.
Q: We also have people on the ground who have been saying that the streets are quieter nowand that is because they feel that they're paralyzed by fear -- fear of people gone missing,fear of violence, that perhaps this is a movement that's gone underground or perhaps isdying. Do you have any concern over that?

President Obama: Yes. I have concern about how peaceful demonstrators and people whowant their votes counted may be stifled from expressing those concerns. I think, as I saidbefore, there are certain international norms of freedom of speech, freedom of expression --
Q: Then why won't you allow the photos --
President Obama: Hold on a second, Helen. That's a different question. And I think it'simportant for us to make sure that we let the Iranian people know that we are watchingwhat's happening, that they are not alone in this process. Ultimately, though, what's going tobe most important is what happens in Iran. And we've all been struck by the courage ofpeople. And I mentioned this I think in a statement that I made a couple of days ago. Some ofyou who had been covering my campaigns know this is one of my favorite expressions, wasDr. King's expression that "the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice."We have to believe that ultimately justice will prevail.
All right. Thank you, guys.