Greetings, massive!  Wah gwaan, Jamaica? Can everybody please give Aubrey a big round ofapplause for the great introduction? I want to thank the University of the West Indies forhosting us.  Big up, You-Wee! Thank you.  I’ve been making myself at home here.   
It is great to be in beautiful Jamaica -- not only because I’m proud to be the first President ofthe United States to visit in more than 30 years, but because I just like the vibe here. I wasborn on an island, and it was warm, and so I feel right at home. 
And I’m grateful for the warm Jamaican hospitality that I received this morning, includingfrom Prime Minister Simpson-Miller.  I also had the chance to meet with leaders from acrossthe Caribbean, where we focused on issues of shared prosperity and shared security.  Andtomorrow, I’ll meet with leaders from across the hemisphere at the Summit of the Americas inPanama. 
But before my trip became all business, I wanted to come here and hear from young peoplelike you.  Because it is your generation who will shape the future of our countries and ourregion and this planet that we share long after those of us who are currently in public serviceare gone from the stage.
So I’m going to only speak for a few minutes at the top, because I’d rather spend time takingquestions from you, and also because after we have a chance for our town hall, I get a chanceto say hi to Usain Bolt and Shelly Ann Fraser-Pryce.
  
When you have the fastest people on the planet, you’ve got to say hi to them, right?  Becausethat’s fast. There are a lot of people out there, and they’re the fastest.  
Now, we are not just nations, we’re also neighbors.  Tens of millions of Americans are boundto the Caribbean and the Americas through ties of commerce, but also ties of kin.  More thanone million Americans trace their ancestry to Jamaica.  More than one million Americans visitJamaica each year.  So we’re committed to you and this region.  And as I’ve said before, inour foreign policy there are no senior or junior partners in the Americas; there are justpartners.
And that’s one reason why the United States has started a new chapter in our relations withthe people of Cuba. We will continue to have some differences with the Cuban government,but we don’t want to be imprisoned by the past.  When something doesn’t work for 50 years,you don’t just keep on doing it; you try something new. And we are as committed as ever tosupporting human rights and political freedom in Cuba and around the world.  But I believethat engagement is a more powerful force than isolation, and the changes we are making canhelp improve the lives of the Cuban people.  And I also believe that this new beginning will begood for the United States and the entire hemisphere. 
My point is, I believe we can move past some of the old debates that so often define theregion, and move forward in a way that benefits your generation with new thinking -- anenergetic, impatient, dynamic and diverse generation that you represent, both in the UnitedStates and across this hemisphere.  More than 100 million people in Latin America and theCaribbean are between the ages of 15 and 24.  Most of the region is under 35. 
And what gives me so much hope about your generation is that you’re more interested in thehard work of waging peace than resorting to the quick impulses of conflict.  You’re moreinterested in the hard work of building prosperity through entrepreneurship, not cronyism orcorruption. You’re more eager for progress that comes not by holding down any segment ofsociety, but by holding up the rights of every human being, regardless of what we look like, orhow we pray, or who we love. 
You care less about the world as it has been, and more about the world as it should be andcan be.  And unlike any other time in our history, the technology at your disposal means thatyou don’t have to wait for the change that you’re looking for; you have the freedom to createit in your own in powerful and disruptive ways.  Many of you already have, whether bystarting your own enterprises or by helping others start theirs.
And I’m going to just single out two remarkable young leaders who are here today because Ithink they’re an example of what is possible, even in the most difficult of circumstances. 
So Angeline Jackson is here today.  Where is Angeline?  There she is, right there.  
  
Several years ago, when Angeline was 19, she and a friend were kidnapped, held at gunpointand sexually assaulted.  And as a woman, and as a lesbian, justice and society were notalways on her side.  But instead of remaining silent, she chose to speak out and started herown organization to advocate for women like her, and get them treatment and get themjustice, and push back against stereotypes, and give them some sense of their own power.
And she became a global activist.  But more than anything, she cares about her Jamaica, andmaking it a place where everybody, no matter their color, or their class, or their sexualorientation, can live in equality and opportunity.  That’s the power of one person, what theycan do. 
Jerome Cowans grew up in a tough part of Kingston.  Where’s Jerome? When Jerome was 12,he saw a friend gunned down.  And when he looked at the shooters, he said, “I realized thatwasn’t a life I wanted to live.  They had expensive machinery, but they had nothing else.”  Soat the ripe old age of 13, he founded a youth group to help others like him stay on the rightpath.  And he started small, with only six people, but they had one big thing in common andthey believed that change was possible.
And like Angeline, he was threatened for his work, but he kept at it.  And he said, “Thingswon’t get any better if no one does anything.”  And today, the LEAD Youth Club he started hassix chapters, including one in Colombia.  His work has taken him to five continents.  Last year,he became the first Jamaican to receive the Nelson Mandela Innovation Award.  He’s just 25years old.   
So individuals like those two young people -- the young people here today -- you remind meof something that Bob Marley once said.  You know I went to his house yesterday.   I thought,I'm only five minutes from his house, I got to go check it out. And one of the displays has todo when he was shot right before a concert he was supposed to give, trying to bring thepolitical factions in Jamaica together.  And he was treated for his wounds and he went aheadwith the program, went ahead with the show.  And somebody asked, well, why would you dothat?  He said, “The people who are trying to make this world worse are not taking the dayoff.  Why should I?”  Why should I?   
So none of us can afford to take the day off.  And I want you to have every chance, every toolyou need to make this world better.  So today I’m announcing nearly $70 million in U.S.investments in education, training, and employment programs for our young peoplethroughout Latin America and the Caribbean. And these investments will help young people inunemployed and impoverished and marginalized communities, and give them a chance to gainthe skills they need to compete and succeed in the 21st century economy.
And that’s not all.  As President, some of the initiatives I’m most proud of are ones thatincrease my country’s engagement with the next generation of leaders like Angeline andJerome and all of you -- leaders in government and civil society, and entrepreneurship and theprivate sector.
  
Four years ago, I launched an initiative called “100,000 Strong in the Americas.”  And the goalwas to have 100,000 U.S. students studying in this region, and 100,000 of this region’sstudents studying in the United States by the end of this decade.  And we are on track tomeet that goal. 
So today, to build on that progress, I’m proud to launch the Young Leaders of the AmericasInitiative right here in Kingston. Let me say this.  This is not your traditional exchange.  We’regoing to seek out the most innovative young entrepreneurs and civil society leaders in theCaribbean, Latin America, and we're going to give them a chance to earn a substantialcontinuum of the training and the resources and the connections, the networks and the capitalthat you need to make a difference.
So this year, we’ll bring two dozen entrepreneurs and civil society leaders from Latin Americaand the Caribbean -- including young Cuban leaders -- to the United States. Then next year,we’ll increase this fellowship to 250 young leaders.  And we’ll help you to expand yourcommercial and social ventures; we'll embed you in an American business and incubators. We’ll give U.S. participants the chance to continue their collaboration with you in your homecountries.
So the idea is that you’ll get a chance to implement your ideas but now have linkages thatgive you access to capital and research and all the things you need to mobilize and implementthe kinds of things that you're doing.
And this isn't charity for us.  This is an investment in your future, because that means it's aninvestment in our future -- a future where climate researchers in the Amazon can collaboratewith scientists in Alaska.  An idea in Barbados suddenly can be developed in an incubator inBoston.  Anti-gang activities in Honduras can be connected to similar activities in Houston,Texas.  It’s a future where any kid from Kingston can choose a path that opens his or herhorizons beyond their neighborhood to the wider world.  
And that impulse to make the world better, to push back on those who try to make it worse,that’s something that your generation has to hold on to.  And you have to remember, it’snever easy; there are no days off.  But if there’s one thing that I know from my own life, it’sthat with hard work and with hope, change is always within our reach.
The Jamaican-American poet Claude McKay, who was a central figure of the Harlemrenaissance, once wrote something along those lines:  “We must strive on to gain the heightalthough it may not be in sight.”  As long as we’ve got young strivers like you -- and I hope tosee you in Washington as part of this Young Leaders of the Americas Initiative -- I’m confidentthat a brighter future will always be in sight.
So thank you very much.  With that, let’s take some questions. Alright? So....
[off mic....transmission problems]
  
President Obama:  All right, since we’re getting to work I’m going to take my jacket off andget comfortable.  All right.  There...are no rules to this except that there are people withmicrophones in the audience, so wait for them to come when I call on you.  We’re going to goboy, girl, boy, girl so everybody gets a chance, so it’s fair.   
Before your question, please introduce yourself and tell us where you are from, okay?  And tryto keep your question or comment relatively short so we can get more questions or commentsin, okay?  We’ll start with this young lady right here in the white blouse.  It’s a little tighthere.
Question: Thank you.  Yani Campbell [ph], a lecturer at the University of the West Indies. Thank you so much for your talk, very interesting.  And I wondered as well, on the Cubanissue, now that your policy has actually changed towards Cuba, I wondered about your viewson how it is that we should approach -- CARICOM should approach its relationship with Cubain terms of deepening that relationship.  Should they now perhaps move to join in CARICOM? Thank you.
President Obama:  Well, first of all, I think CARICOM can make its own decisions and we’llrespect it.  Cuba will be participating in the Summit of the Americas, and I think -- it is mystrong belief that if we engage, that that offers the greatest prospect for escaping some of theconstraints of the past.
I think the Cuban people are extraordinary and have huge potential.  And what’s encouragingis, is that the overwhelming majority of Cubans are interested in ending the Cold War -- thelast vestige of the Cold War -- and moving forward.  It’s going to take some time for theUnited States to fully implement some of the things that have already been agreed to, and it’sgoing to take a little bit longer before you actually have complete normal relations betweenthe United States and Cuba. 
What I would say to Caribbean countries is, absolutely, you should continue to engage in Cubain the ways that you’ve already doing -- you’ve already done in the past.  I do think that it isimportant for all of us to be able to speak honestly where we see concerns about issues ofhuman rights and political freedom.  And I’m not saying anything publicly that I haven’t saiddirectly to Raul Castro.  There are still constraints on the ability of the Cuban people toexpress themselves, or to organize political parties, or to start a business.  And sometimes,the same things we expect for ourselves and our country, somehow we think other peopledon’t want. 
But I believe that each country -- I believe each country has its own unique cultures, its ownunique traditions.  I don’t expect every country to pursue the same policies or have the samepolitical practices as the United States.  And I am certainly aware of the flaws that exist in ourown country that we have to fix.  But I do believe there are certain principles that areuniversal.
  
I think that all people want basic dignity and want basic freedom, and want to be able toworship as they please without being discriminated against, or they should be able to speaktheir mind about an important issue pertaining to their community without being arrested. And so wherever we see that, we try to speak out. 
But what we also try to do is engage and recognize that even with countries that we havedifferences, there’s also going to be commonality and overlap.  And the United States andCuba should both have an interest in dealing with climate change, for example, because whenthe oceans start lapping upon Miami or on Havana, nobody is going to distinguish, well, wheredo they stand on this or that ideological issue.  And so we have to find where there are areasof cooperation, but I will continue to try to be consistent in speaking out on behalf of theissues that are important to all people, not just some.
All right, it’s a gentleman’s turn.  This gentleman right here.  He looks very serious; he’s gotglasses.  Looking sharp.  Plus, he’s got a copy of my book. So he’s clearly a wise man.
Question: Thank you very much.  My name is Chef Brian Lumley -- I’m a young Jamaicanchef here. And I own a restaurant -- 689 by Brian Lumley. Just saying. My question to you --I’m going to stay a little bit off the politics for a bit.  And I’ve witnessed your journey a lot,and the question is kind of two-part.  If you go back and give yourself one piece of advicebefore the start of you 2008 term, what would it be?  And the second part is if you can signthis book when you’re finished. Thank you very much.
President Obama:  I’ll sign the book.  So the question was, for those couldn’t hear:  If Iwere to go back and give myself advice before I started in 2008, what would the advice be?
I suppose I could have started dying my hair earlier -- so then people wouldn’t say, man, he’sgetting old.  You’re going like this -- at least I got hair, man. I’m teasing you.  I’m messingwith you. 
I think that -- keep in mind that when I came into office we were going through the worstglobal financial crisis since the 1930s, and so we had to make a series of decisions veryquickly, many of which were unpopular.  Overall, I think we got it right.  I think we did theright thing.  And because, I think, we took these steps, not only were we able to avoid thekind of Great Depression that we saw in the 1930s, not only was America able to bounce backand start growing more rapidly than most of our peers, drive down unemployment faster,create more jobs faster, but that also had an impact on the global economy and it had animpact on the Caribbean economy, that we were able to bounce back quicker than we mighthave if we hadn't taken those steps.
But it was, I think, costly politically.  And what I would have probably advised was that Imight have needed to warn the American people and paint a picture for them that was moreaccurate about the fact that it would take some time to dig ourselves out of a very big hole.  
  
Because FDR, when he came into office, the Great Depression had already been going on fortwo, three years, and so people understood how serious it was.  With us, we came in just aspeople were really starting to feel the impacts.  And trying to paint a picture that we'll make itbut it's going to take some time, and here are the steps that we need to take -- I think Iwould have advised myself to do a better job spending more time not just getting the policyright, but also describing it in ways that people understood, that gave them confidence in theirown future.  I think that would probably be the most important advice that I would have givenmyself.   
All right, it's a young lady’s turn.  That young lady right there.  Yes, you.  You, yes.  Oh, well,I'll call on both of you.  I'll call on you later.  Go ahead.
Question: Okay, so we're here and we’re looking at you, and we're all very honored to behere and very taken about by your leadership qualities.  And seeing that you are the Presidentof the United States of America and you’re so influential, I want to know how you handle themental strain that comes with being in charge of so much.
President Obama:  What’s your name?
Question:  Kimberly -- from the University of the West Indies. 
President Obama:  Fantastic.  How do I handle stress?  You know, I'll be honest with you. One of the things that happens as you get older is you start appreciating both your strengthsand your weaknesses.  Hopefully you gain a little wisdom about what you're good at and whatyou're not.  And Michelle can give you a long list of things I'm not good at. But one thing thatI've always had, which has served me well, is a pretty good temperament.  And I attributethat partly from growing up on an island with trade winds and beaches, and it makes youcalm.  But I try not to get too high when things are going well so that I don't get too low whenthings are going badly, and try to keep a long view of how the process of social change takesplace, and how the trajectory of your own life is going to proceed.
We get caught up in the day-to-day so much, and it’s interesting now when I’m talking to mydaughters and “somebody said something at school,” or there’s -- “well, I didn’t do quite aswell on that test as I wanted.”  And you want them to take it seriously, but you also want tosay to them, you know what, this, too, shall pass; I promise you three months from now,much less 30 years from now, you will not remember. 
And so I think that trying to keep your eye on the prize of where it is that you want to go andnot be discouraged or overly impressed with yourself on a day-to-day basis I think is veryimportant.  And then you have to get some exercise in the morning. I don’t run as fast asthese folks, but I get a little exercise, which does help in terms of stress relief.
All right.  It’s a gentleman’s turn.  Let’s see, somebody from this side.  This young man righthere in the sharp-looking checkered shirt.
  
Question:  Good afternoon again, Mr. President.  Especially as it relates to human rights andsocial change -- I’m Jomain McKenzie and I’m a focal point with the Global Fund Board.  As itrelates to human rights and social change, how do you make the decision to allow societies togo through the natural evolutionary process of having change occur on their own versushaving governments exert policies to make these same political social changes?
President Obama:  That’s a really interesting question.  It’s an interesting question and it’sone that I have to struggle with all the time. 
Every society, as I said, is at a different phase in development, in their own history; they havedifferent cultural traditions.  And so the way I think about it is, is that the United States hascertain core values and principles that we believe deeply in.  And we don’t necessarily expectthat every country will formulate how to secure those ideals and those principles.  We don’texpect it to be done exactly as we do any more than we expect every -- obviously, ourdemocracy is not the same as a Jamaican democracy or a British democracy or Australiandemocracy.  But we believe in democracy.  We think that if people have the ability to speakout about their own lives, some sense of agency, then that society will be stronger.  And thatdoesn’t mean that we won’t work with a country that doesn’t precisely abide by thoseprinciples, but we will still speak out. 
There are times where a country is clearly engaging in activities that are so egregious that it’snot culturally specific; it typically has to do with a government wanting to exert control overpeople and oppress them.  And in those instances, I think it is entirely appropriate for us tospeak out forcibly and, in some cases, to not do business with them.
Look at a country like North Korea.  I mean, obviously, Korean culture is different thanAmerican culture.  On the other hand, you look at what’s happening in South Korea and youlook at what’s happening in North Korea and those are two entirely different societies.  And Ican tell you which one you’d rather live in. 
And if you have a situation in which people are being murdered simply because they didn’tagree with the government on something or didn’t want their economic fate to be entirelydetermined by the whims of some government bureaucrat, and suddenly they’re sent to alabor camp -- that’s something where we as an international community have to speak out on.
And then there are some issues that may be culturally specific, but you know what, I thinkthey’re wrong.  I won’t -- we’re not going to try to force that country to change, but I may tryto shame that country.  There are nations where slavery still exists.  And that may be part ofthe ancient culture in that society, but slavery is wrong.  And I’m not going to give them theexcuse that, well, this is who we are. 
In Africa -- and I can speak I think fairly as somebody who is the son of an African father --there are practices like female genital mutilation that may be part of the tradition there, butit’s wrong.  And I’m going to say so.  And it will be U.S. policy to say that it’s wrong. 
  
So the tools we use to try to bring about change around the world may vary.  And as I saidearlier, we’re not always perfectly consistent.  There are times where we’ve got allies who arenot observing all the human rights we would like, and there are times where there arecountries that are adversaries of ours where they do some things quite well.  And you can’texpect us, or any country, to be perfectly consistent in every circumstance.  But what I’vetried to do is be fairly consistent in terms of what we believe, what we stand for, and then weuse different tools depending on what we think will bring about the most change.  In somecases, it will just be a diplomatic statement; in some cases, it may be serious enough that wewill organize -- try to organize the United Nations or other multilateral forums to speak outagainst certain practices.  In some cases, it may be so egregious that we need to sanctionthem, and we will try to organize the international community in that way.
And then finally, in the ultimate circumstance, where the violations of our values are so severethat they start spilling over and -- in the instance of, for example, genocide -- we may be sayto ourselves, in concert with the international community, we need to intervene because thisgovernment is so brutal and so unacceptable that we need to protect people.  But we do thatin the context of an international conversation so that we’re not simply making these decisions-- or we’re not so arrogant that we’re not paying attention to what the rest of the worldcommunity is saying.
This young lady who I originally had called on and got skipped over.  No, no, this one righthere.  Yes.  Right here.  I’m sorry, I love you, too, though.   
Question: Good afternoon, Mr. President.  My name is Katrina King-Smith.  I’m from theTurks and Caicos Islands.  My question is two-part, as well.  Firstly, in countries such as theTurks and Caicos Islands where the population is small and our main sources of revenue aretourism and foreign direct investment, I was wondering if you can suggest two ways that thegovernment may better generate and regulate sustainable revenue, especially withregulations currently being put in place to close off-shore financial centers. 
And secondly, I was wondering if after your term has ended, would you mind coming to theTurks and Caicos to vacation?   
President Obama:  On the second question, absolutely. I’ll do some island-hopping once I’mout of office.  And you guys can show me all the good places to go.   
On this issue of off-shore financial centers, we respect each country to set up its own financialregulations.  And we recognize that for small countries, that providing services -- includingfinancial services -- may be an important source of revenue. 
The one thing that we have to make sure of is that these financial centers are not either usedfor illicit money laundering or tax avoidance by large U.S. corporations that set up cut-outs orfront organizations, but as a practical matter are operating in the United States, employing
  
folks in the United States, essentially headquartered in the United States and yet, somehow,their mailing address is such-and-such island where they have to pay no taxes.
Those are the kinds of egregious concerns that we’re trying to deal with.  I think we try totake it on a case-by-case basis.  And in my CARICOM meeting that I just had, this issue wasbrought up.  There were a number of leaders who expressed concern that maybe they werebeing unfairly labeled as areas of high financial risk.  And what I committed to them is we willexamine their complaints and go through in very concrete ways where our concerns are andhow our governments can work together.
More broadly, I think that the -- if you look at some of the most successful countries in theworld, they’re actually pretty small countries -- like Singapore, for example -- that on paperlook like they have no assets, and yet, if you go to Singapore, it has one of the higheststandards of living in the world.  What is it that Singapore did that might be replicable?
Well, one of the most important things they did was they made an enormous investment intheir people. And if you’ve got a highly skilled, highly educated workforce, if you’ve set uprules of law and governance that are transparent and non-corrupt, then you can attractactually a lot of service industries to supplement the tourist industry, because people wouldwant to locate in your country.  You could envision people wanting to operate and have officesthere where you’ve got a trained workforce.  And these days, so many businesses areoperating over the Internet that if you’ve got a really skilled workforce that provides valueadded, you will attract companies and you’ll attract businesses.
What deters people from investing in most countries is conflict, corruption, and a lack of skillsor infrastructure.  And those countries that are able to address those problems have rule oflaw and eliminate corruption.  Make sure that you are investing in the education of yourpeople and it’s a continuous education; it doesn’t just stop at the lower grades, but you givepeople constant opportunities to upgrade their skills.  You have a decent infrastructure --you’re going to be able to succeed.  That’s the recipe, the formula for a 21st-centuryeconomy.
All right.  Uh oh, they’re starting to holler at me. Let’s see, I haven’t gone back here in awhile.  This gentleman in the blue shirt right here. 
Question:  Thanks so much, Mr. President.  We know that there’s been an increasing militaryassertiveness of China, especially in the South China Sea.  And it seems that the U.S. hasresponded to that by pledging to increase its military presence because it recognizes thedanger that that military increase of China poses to its friends and allies there.  Now, China’sgrowing power isn’t just military, it’s economic.  On this side of the world, China has used thissoft power, this economic power especially to woo Caribbean governments. 
  
My questions are, how does the U.S. view China’s influence in its own backyard, especiallysince you’ve just talked about the Cold War and alliances?  And secondly, what plan does theU.S. have, if any, to contribute more to economic life in the Caribbean to ward off China interms of foreign direct investment? Thank you very much, Mr. President. 
President Obama:  What’s your name?
Question:  Oh, sorry.  My name is Newton Harris from the University of Technology-Jamaica.  
President Obama:  Fantastic.  Well, first of all, let me say that it is U.S. official policy and itis my strong belief that we should welcome China’s peaceful rise.  What China has done in thelast 20, 30 years is remarkable.  More people have been lifted out of poverty in a shorterperiod of time than perhaps any time in human history. And that’s good for the world.  Imean, we should be more fearful of a poorer, collapsing China than a China that isparticipating in the world marketplace and trading and is getting along with its neighbors andpart of the international order, because there are a really large number of Chinese people andwe want them to be doing well.
So our policy is not to fear China’s peaceful rise.  Where we get concerned with China is whereit is not necessarily abiding by international norms and rules, and is using its size and muscleto force countries into subordinate positions.  And that's the concern we have around maritimeissues.  We think this can be solved diplomatically, but just because the Philippines or Vietnamare not as large as China doesn’t mean that they can just be elbowed aside.
And, by the way, we don't have a particular view on the territorial disputes, the maritimedisputes.  Our attitude is simply, let’s use the mechanisms that we have in placeinternationally to resolve them. 
Now, with respect to Chinese investment in the Caribbean or in the Americas, in the WesternHemisphere, my response is the same one that I gave when I was asked this question inAfrica, which is, if China is making investments that are building up infrastructure, orimproving education, or helping the people, then we welcome that.  We think that's great. The only thing is you got to make sure you look at what strings may be attached.  If theinvestments are made and it's solely to build a road to a mine to extract raw materials thatare going to then be immediately going to a port and shipped to China, and if Chinese workersare shipped in to build the road -- and if you don't know exactly what the deal was with thegovernment that led to China getting the contract -- in those situations, it may not be, in fact,serving the long-term interests of the country.
Now, I would say -- by the way, I'd say the same thing about the United States.  So if wecome in with an aid package to your country, and we say we got this great deal, we're goingto give you $100 million for such and such, but if when you evaluate the actual benefits, it's 
  
U.S. companies that are disproportionately benefitting from it, and it's creating a situationwhere over the long term the United States is making a whole lot of profits but is not leavingbehind a sustainable industrial base or ways in which that country can develop, then you haveto evaluate that and try to get a better deal.
So what I'm saying is not unique to China.  I think that's how all countries should beoperating.  Your government should be transparent; it should be clear about what you'regetting.  There should be an accounting of how the money flows. There should be a sense thatover the long term, Jamaican businesses or somebody from Belize is getting a job, or --right?  I mean, there should be some sense of how is this benefitting us over the long term. And that's I think the only criteria that we're going to lay out.
Now, last thing I'll say -- because you asked -- you kind of posed, is there like a bidding wargoing on here for affections.  The Chinese are giving us flowers and chocolates -- what areyou doing for us lately? And so what I would say is this.  The United States, I thinkhistorically, has been an enormous provider of development aid.  Not always, by the way, hasit followed the rule I just laid out in terms of whether or not the local recipients arebenefitting, but I think we've gotten a lot better at that. 
And if you look at institutions like the World Bank or other multilateral institutions, we remainthe largest contributors by far.  So sometimes when you get money from a multilateralinstitution -- you look at who’s doing what; if you look at what happens in terms of when Haitigets decimated, who’s raising the money -- we tend to look pretty good.  It turns out we'redoing more than our fair share.  And we will continue to do that. 
We do have some fiscal constraints.  And sometimes, I think -- when I travel to the Americas,to the region, people ask, why don't we have sort of the kinds of Alliance for Progressprograms with huge sums of money.  Well, part of it is, is that right after World War II, theUnited States was so large relative to the rest of the world.  Japan was decimated; Europewas decimated.  Huge chunks of the world were behind the Iron Curtain.  And so it wasnatural that we gave fivefold or tenfold more than anybody else could do.  Well, things haveevened out, in case you haven't noticed.
We're still, by far, the most powerful nation on Earth and we still do more than everybodyelse, but we do expect others to step up and do their fair share.  But I can guarantee youthis:  We will always do our fair share.  And nowhere is that truer than in the Caribbean and inthe Americas, because you are our neighbors and some of our closest friends.  
Let’s see.  It's a young lady’s turn.  This young lady right here.  Right here. 
Question:  Welcome, Mr. President.  I lived a block away from you in Chicago when I went tothe University of Chicago.
President Obama:  Is that right?
  
Question:  And my college sweetheart, Sam Kass, was your private chef until very recently. 
President Obama:  Oh, wow! Well, you're just putting Sam’s business all out there. Allright.  What’s your name?
Question:  Lisandra Rickards.  I work for the Branson Centre of Entrepreneurship.
President Obama:  Cassandra?
Question:  Lisandra. 
President Obama:  Lisandra.  All right.  Well, I'll tease Sam about this one.   
Question:  Please do.   
President Obama:  Everybody knows about you now.  Go ahead.
Question:  My question is around immigration.  We've heard a lot about your immigrationpolicy for undocumented immigrants who are currently living in the U.S.  But what abouthopeful families that are seeking a legal pathway for immigration into the U.S. but are findingseven- to ten-year delays before they even can get to apply?  I'd love to hear you talk somemore about your policy regarding shortening that timeline and making it less onerous on theapplicants.
President Obama:  Good.  That's a great question.  That's a great question. The UnitedStates is a nation of immigrants.  And this region has contributed to the remarkable progressthat the United States has made over the last two centuries.  And my goal during the courseof my presidency has been to make sure we continue to be a nation of immigrants as well as anation of laws, and that we're attracting talent from all around the world. 
Part of what makes us special is you walk in Brooklyn and there are folks from everywhere. But they’re all striving, they’re all talented, they’re all trying to make their dreams come true. And that is what gives us the energy and the strength to be able to accomplish everythingwe've accomplished. 
So we need to fix what is, right now, a broken immigration system.  Part of it is dealing withthose who are undocumented but who have been living there a long time, are part of thecommunity, providing them with a pathway in which they have to earn a legal status, butrecognizing that they’re there and we're not going to be separating out families.  That's notwho we are.  That's not true to our values.  And ultimately, it's not good for our economy.
  
But you are absolutely right that part of the reason that some people take the illegal route isbecause we make the legal route so difficult.  And so we're trying to identify ways tostreamline that process.
Now, I have to be honest.  A lot of people want to come to America.  So unless we just had noborders, there’s always going to be a wait.  There’s always going to be background checks. There’s always going to be some prioritization in terms of who’s admitted and who’s not.  ButI do think that there are practices we have -- for example, where someone has a relation inthe United States, is clearly qualified to become at some point a legal resident and maybe inthe future a citizen, but in order to do it they have to first leave the country, wait, and nowthey’re separated from their families.  I mean, there have to be ways in which we can makethe system clearer and less burdensome.
Some of those changes we wanted to make were in the legislation that was proposed andpassed the United States Senate.  I think there is still the opportunity to get that done beforemy presidency is over, but it does require the Republican Party I think to engage with me in amore serious effort, and to put aside the politics.
Thank you very much for the question. All right, this side has been neglected right here.  I'mgoing to go with this guy with the beard, man, because he looks a little bit like -- he looks alittle bit like Marshawn Lynch.   
Question:  Greetings, Mr. President.
President Obama:  How are you?
Question:  More life and blessings on you and your family. 
President Obama:  What’s your name?
Question:  My name is Miguel Williams, but you can call -- I am Steppa.   
President Obama:  Steppa.
Question:  Ya mon, that is quite sufficient.  My question has to do and surrounds U.S. policyas it regards the -- the legalization, the decriminalization of marijuana. 
President Obama:  How did I anticipate this question?  
Question:  Ya mon...Ya mon...Ya mon.
President Obama:  How did I guess this question? 
  
Question:  Yes.  And, Mr. President, it really comes on the foreground of -- we face economicchallenges with the IMF, et cetera.  And and we find realistically that the hemp industry, themarijuana industry provides a highly feasible alternative to rise above poverty.  So I amwanting to over stand and to understand how U.S. is envisioning and how you would you seeJamaica pushing forward on a decriminalization, legalization emphasis on the hemp industry.
President Obama:  Okay.  Well. Let me -- I do want to separate out what are serious issuesin the United States and then how that relates to our foreign policy and our interactions withthe region.  There is the issue of legalization of marijuana, and then there is the issue ofdecriminalizing or dealing with the incarceration and, in some cases, devastation ofcommunities as a consequence of nonviolent drug offenses. 
I am a very strong believer that the path that we have taken in the United States in the so-
called “War on Drugs” has been so heavy in emphasizing incarceration that it has beencounterproductive.  You have young people who did not engage in violence who get very longpenalties, get placed in prison, and then are rendered economically unemployable, are almostpushed into, then, the underground economy, learn crime more effectively in prison, familiesare devastated.
So it’s been very unproductive.  And what we’re trying to do is to reform our criminal justicesystem.  And the good news is there has actually been some interest on the part of unlikelyallies like the evangelical community or some otherwise very conservative Republicans,because it’s very expensive to incarcerate people, and a recognition that this may not be thebest approach.  So that’s one issue.
There’s then the second issue of legalizing marijuana, whether it’s medical marijuana orrecreational use.  There are two states in the United States that have embarked on anexperiment to decriminalize or legalize marijuana -- Colorado and Washington State.  And wewill see how that experiment works its way through the process. 
Right now, that is not federal policy, and I do not foresee anytime soon Congress changingthe law at a national basis.  But I do think that if there are states that show that they are notsuddenly a magnet for additional crime, that they have a strong enough public healthinfrastructure to push against the potential of increased addiction, then it’s conceivable thatthat will spur on a national debate.  But that is going to be some time off.
And then the third issue is what will U.S. international policy be.  And we had some discussionwith the CARICOM countries about this.  I know on paper a lot of folks think, you know what,if we just legalize marijuana, then it’ll reduce the money flowing into the transnational drugtrade, there are more revenues and jobs created. 
  
I have to tell you that it’s not a silver bullet, because, first of all, if you are legalizingmarijuana, then how do you deal with other drugs, and where do you draw the line?  Secondof all, as is true in the global economy generally, if you have a bunch of small medium-sizedmarijuana businesses scattered across the Caribbean and this is suddenly legal, if you thinkthat big multi-national companies are not going to suddenly come in and market and try tocontrol and profit from the trade -- that’s I think a very real scenario.
And so I think we have to have a conversation about this, but our current policy continues tobe that in the United States, we need to decrease demand.  We need to focus on a publichealth approach to decreasing demand.  We have to stop the flow of guns and cash into theCaribbean and Central America and Latin America. And at the same time, I think theCaribbean, Latin America have to -- Central America -- have to cooperate with us to try toshrink the power of the transnational drug organizations that are vicious and hugelydestructive. 
And if we combine a public health perspective, a focus on not simply throwing every low-levelperson with possession into prison by trying to get them treatment, if we combine that witheconomic development and alternative opportunities for youth, then I think we can strike theright balance.  It may not comport with your -- completely with your vision for the future, butI think that we could certainly have a smarter approach to it than we currently do.
Got time for one more question.  One more question.  Let’s see -- this is always hard.  It’salways hard to be that last -- it’s a lady’s turn, so all the guys just have to put down theirhands.  It’s too late for you.  Let’s see.  You know what, I’m just going to go with this younglady right here.  She’s just right in front.  Go ahead, yes, you.  Hold on a second, wait for themic.   
Question:  Afternoon, Mr. President.  I’m Alana Williams [ph], I’m from the South Side ofChicago.
President Obama:  Wait, you’re from Chicago?
Question:  Yes!
President Obama:  Well, what are you doing here?  This is supposed to be for Caribbeanyoung ladies.
Question:  Actually, I attend Olivet Nazarene University and I’m studying abroad, so I’mhere. 
President Obama:  I see, okay.  Well, you’re cheating a little bit.  I’ll have to call onsomebody else after you. But I’m going to go ahead and let you ask a question real quick. Because I’ll see you in Chicago.   
  
Question:  Most definitely.  My question is really more so about home.  I love my city, butthe violence is terrible, specifically amongst young black men.  And I know we’re talking a lotabout police brutality, but I’ve lost a lot of friends from people who look just like me.  Andthat’s the problem.  And so I would like to know what you believe is the true source of theviolence, and what is one solution to an extreme problem.  Thank you.
President Obama:  Well, look, I know you asked it about Chicago but I know there areneighborhoods right here in Jamaica that have the same problems, and in every place allacross the Caribbean; certainly in Central America. 
I don’t think there is just one single factor.  Obviously, a contributor is one that we just talkedabout, which is the drug trade.  If you have an illicit trade that generates huge amounts ofmoney and is not regulated above board, that is going to attract ultimately people trying tocarve out turf, trying to control markets, and violence ensues.  So that’s point number one.
Point number two is the easy accessibility of weapons.  And we were talking earlier aboutdifferent traditions; the United States has a tradition of gun ownership that is deep; datesback to the pioneer past.  And I think it is a mistake that we do not do a better job of puttingin place common-sense gun-safety regulations that would keep guns out of the hands ofcriminals, but unfortunately a majority of Congress does not agree with me.  Even after six-
year-olds were gunned down viciously in their classroom, we could not get action done.  Butwhat we are doing is cooperating with the region as we are cooperating with local jurisdictionsto try to stem at least the flow of guns using the administrative tools that I have.  So that’snumber two.
Number three is providing alternative paths for young people.  If a young person is reading bythe age -- by the third grade and at grade level, if they are enjoying school, if they see a pathfor success, then they are less likely to get involved in criminal activity and that will reducegun violence, and that will reduce crime, and that will reduce death. Which means investing inthings like early childhood education and improving our schools -- those things are absolutelyvital.  
But there is a fourth element to this, and that is our own responsibility.  And particularly, as Ispeak to young people here today, we always talk about what can we do about the violence asif it’s like just separate and apart.  But we have control in our communities of our immediatefriends, our immediate family.  We influence our peers.  And I do think that the power that allof you have as young leaders to be able to not make excuses for violence -- because there area whole bunch of folks who have really tough backgrounds and come from terriblecircumstances, and are really poor, but they don’t go around shooting somebody.  They don’tbeat somebody over the head because of sneakers or because they looked at them the wrongway.
  
And so there is an element of us retaking our communities and being willing to speak outagainst violence in our midst.  That doesn’t ignore all the social factors.  But Dr. King used tosay it’s not an either/or situation, it’s a both/and situation. 
Government has to act.  We have to have effective policing, which means policing that isactually protecting as opposed to some of the things that we’ve been seeing of late in theUnited States, and I’m sure is true in other countries.  And I say that saying that police havean extraordinarily difficult job, and the overwhelming majority do a great job under severecircumstances.  But there’s got to be trust built between the communities, and I had to put atask force together that put together some excellent reports in the wake of Ferguson aroundhow we can do that.
But ultimately, what happens in the home, what happens in the school -- some of you areparents already; some of you will be parents -- what we teach our children in terms of values,valuing themselves, valuing others, that’s important, too.  
So there’s no single solution.  But all of us have to do better.  Because the tragedy of what wesee in the United States but also in cities and towns all across the Caribbean and CentralAmerica, is terrible.  And there’s no excuse for it. 
All right.  Because I called accidentally on a Chicagoan, I’ve got to call on one more person. Look, this young lady stood up, so she showed -- that wasn’t fair, but I called on her, goahead.  You’re not from Chicago are you? 
Question:  No.
President Obama:  You promise?  Okay.  All right, get the mic -- oh, I’m sorry.  You knowwhat, I confess, even though I was going to call on you, she thought she was going to becalled on.  I’m going to call on both of you now, but each of you get a really short question. Really short, quick.
Question:  Well, I’m the team leader for the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor and I want tothank you for the initiatives that you’re planning to do here.  And I wanted to invite you to ourannual general meeting that’s going to be held in Babson in the States, so we want you tocome because you are part of a global team.  So I’m representing Jamaica as the youngestfemale team leader, and I’m inviting you to come so we can talk about Startup America andwe can collaborate on different projects.  So I’m inviting you to come to that event.
President Obama:  Okay, that was good.  And I can say I’ll await your invitation.  And whatI will say very quickly is entrepreneurship, small- and medium-sized businesses, that is apriority and that means that we’ve got to create channels for access to capital, technicaltraining.  These are areas where a lot of our development aid is shifting. 
  
Instead of just giving somebody a fish, we want to teach them how to fish. And what you’reseeing -- what you see among young people all around the world is, is that instead of justfinding a job in a big organization, they may want to create something of their own, a newvision.  And that kind of creativity has to be tapped.  So we’re shifting a lot of the work thatwe do around issues of entrepreneurship, so I’ll be interested in seeing what you have to say.
All right.  This young lady right here, go ahead.
Question:  Hello, everyone.  Hi, Mr. President.  My name is Davianne Tucker, and I’m theGuild president-elect for the University of the West Indies. Thank you.  So my question is, theJamaican government has been holding firmly to the stipulations of the IMF agreement.  Thereare many who would like to know if the debt write-offs for Jamaica are being considered as ameans of improving the livelihood of our people.  So is that being considered?
President Obama:  Well, this came up in my bilateral with your Prime Minister.  And, look,historically, I think there has been times where the IMF or the international multilateralorganizations worked with governments in ways that weren’t always productive, got themdeep into debt, and then suddenly you’ve got a lot more flowing out than was going in.  Andin some cases there were governments around the world that were corrupt, lent money,money goes into a Swiss bank account, suddenly the people are paying off for decades.
In Jamaica, some of it just had to do with tough circumstances, not always the best fiscalmanagement.  I think that the current government has been wise to work hard to abide bythe IMF provisions.  That’s not been easy.  And I think that has been the right thing to do. 
But what I also agreed with, when I spoke to the Prime Minister, is the need to try to addressin a more systematic fashion how we can spur growth and not just put the squeeze on folks. Because what it turns out is, is that if a -- the best way for a country to reduce its debt is togrow really fast, and to generate more income.   
Now, that does require development plans and approaches that are productive.  And it is truethat sometimes that requires some short-term sacrifice.  And I think the question that thepeople of Jamaica, just like the people of the United States and everywhere else, should beasking is:  If the government is spending money right now, is it on something that is going tohelp create long-term growth and help people succeed? If the answer is no, you shouldn’tspend that money. 
Spending money just for the sake of spending money is not -- that’s not the formula forsuccess.  But if the money is being spent on what we talked about -- early childhoodeducation; if it’s being spent on infrastructure; if it’s being spent on research; if it’s beingspent on building skills for workers -- those are good investments. And I do think that theinternational financial institutions have to accommodate the interests of countries who have a 
  
sound plan for growth so that they can not just stay in this static state but can, over time,thrive and succeed.  And the way that’s going to happen is because of outstanding youngleaders like you. 
I’ve had a great conversation.
Thank you, Jamaica.  Thank you.  Appreciate it, young leaders.
God bless you.
