Good morning. Thank you very much. Good morning. Thank you. Thank you so much. Please,have a seat. Thank you.
What a remarkable, remarkable crowd. Thank you, Rosy, for your very kind introduction. I didnot know you played basketball. I will take your word for it. Rosy, thank you for your manyyears of friendship. Back in Chicago, when I was just getting started in national politics, Ireached out to a lot of people for advice and counsel, and Rosy was one of the veryfirst. When I made my first visit to Israel, after entering the Senate, Rosy, you were at myside every step of that profound journey through the Holy Land. So I want to thank you foryour enduring friendship, your leadership, and for your warm introduction today.
I also want to thank David Victor, Howard Kohr and all the board of directors. And let me saythat it is wonderful to look out and see so many great friends, including a very largedelegation from Chicago. Alan Solow, Howard Green. Thank you all.
I want to thank the members of Congress who are joining you today -- who do so much tosustain the bonds between the United States and Israel, including Eric Cantor -- Steny Hoyer -
- and the tireless leader I was proud to appoint as the new chair of the DNC, DebbieWasserman Schultz.
We’re joined by Israel’s representative to the United States, Ambassador Michael Oren. Andwe’re joined by one of my top advisors on Israel and the Middle East for the past four yearsand who I know is going to be an outstanding ambassador to Israel, Dan Shapiro. Dan hasalways been a close and trusted advisor and friend, and I know that he will do a terrific job.
  
And at a time when so many young people around the world are standing up and making theirvoices heard, I also want to acknowledge all the college students from across the country whoare here today. No one has a greater stake in the outcome of events that are unfolding todaythan your generation, and it’s inspiring to see you devote your time and energy to help shapethat future.
Now, I’m not here to subject you to a long policy speech. I gave one on Thursday in which Isaid that the United States sees the historic changes sweeping the Middle East and NorthAfrica as a moment of great challenge, but also a moment of opportunity for greater peaceand security for the entire region, including the State of Israel.
On Friday, I was joined at the White House by Prime Minister Netanyahu, and we reaffirmed --we reaffirmed that fundamental truth that has guided our presidents and prime ministers formore than 60 years -- that even while we may at times disagree, as friends sometimes will,the bonds between the United States and Israel are unbreakable -- and the commitment ofthe United States to the security of Israel is ironclad.
A strong and secure Israel is in the national security interest of the United States not simplybecause we share strategic interests, although we do both seek a region where families andchildren can live free from the threat of violence. It’s not simply because we face commondangers, although there can be no denying that terrorism and the spread of nuclear weaponsare grave threats to both our nations. 
America’s commitment to Israel’s security flows from a deeper place -- and that’s the valueswe share. As two people who struggled to win our freedom against overwhelming odds, weunderstand that preserving the security for which our forefathers -- and foremothers -- foughtmust be the work of every generation. As two vibrant democracies, we recognize that theliberties and freedoms we cherish must be constantly nurtured. And as the nation thatrecognized the State of Israel moments after its independence, we have a profoundcommitment to its survival as a strong, secure homeland for the Jewish people.
We also know how difficult that search for security can be, especially for a small nation likeIsrael living in a very tough neighborhood. I’ve seen it firsthand. When I touched my handagainst the Western Wall and placed my prayer between its ancient stones, I thought of allthe centuries that the children of Israel had longed to return to their ancient homeland. WhenI went to Sderot and saw the daily struggle to survive in the eyes of an eight-year-old boywho lost his leg to a Hamas rocket, and when I walked among the Hall of Names at YadVashem, I was reminded of the existential fear of Israelis when a modern dictator seeksnuclear weapons and threatens to wipe Israel off the face of the map -- face of the Earth.
Because we understand the challenges Israel faces, I and my Administration have made thesecurity of Israel a priority. It’s why we’ve increased cooperation between our militaries tounprecedented levels. It’s why we’re making our most advanced technologies available to ourIsraeli allies.
  
It’s why, despite tough fiscal times, we’ve increased foreign military financing to recordlevels. And that includes additional support -- beyond regular military aid -– for the IronDome anti-rocket system. A powerful example of American-Israeli cooperation -- a powerfulexample of American-Israeli cooperation which has already intercepted rockets from Gaza andhelped saved Israeli lives. So make no mistake, we will maintain Israel’s qualitative militaryedge.
You also see our commitment to our shared security in our determination to prevent Iran fromacquiring nuclear weapons. Here in the United States, we’ve imposed the toughest sanctionsever on the Iranian regime. At the United Nations, under our leadership, we’ve secured themost comprehensive international sanctions on the regime, which have been joined by alliesand partners around the world. Today, Iran is virtually cut off from large parts of theinternational financial system, and we’re going to keep up the pressure. So let me beabsolutely clear -- we remain committed to preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
Its illicit nuclear program is just one challenge that Iran poses. As I said on Thursday, theIranian government has shown its hypocrisy by claiming to support the rights of protesterswhile treating its own people with brutality. Moreover, Iran continues to support terrorismacross the region, including providing weapons and funds to terrorist organizations. So we willcontinue to work to prevent these actions, and we will stand up to groups like Hezbollah, whoexercise political assassination and seek to impose their will through rockets and car bombs.
You also see our commitment to Israel’s security in our steadfast opposition to any attempt tode-legitimize the State of Israel. As I said at the United Nations last year, "Israel’s existencemust not be a subject for debate," and "efforts to chip away at Israel’s legitimacy will only bemet by the unshakeable opposition of the United States."
So when the Durban Review Conference advanced anti-Israel sentiment, we withdrew. In thewake of the Goldstone Report, we stood up strongly for Israel’s right to defend itself. When aneffort was made to insert the United Nations into matters that should be resolved throughdirect negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, we vetoed it. 
And so, in both word and deed, we have been unwavering in our support of Israel’ssecurity. And it is precisely because of our commitment to Israel’s long-term security that wehave worked to advance peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Now, I have said repeatedly that core issues can only be negotiated in direct talks betweenthe parties. And I indicated on Thursday that the recent agreement between Fatah and Hamasposes an enormous obstacle to peace. No country can be expected to negotiate with aterrorist organization sworn to its destruction. And we will continue to demand that Hamasaccept the basic responsibilities of peace, including recognizing Israel’s right to exist andrejecting violence and adhering to all existing agreements. And we once again call on Hamasto release Gilad Shalit, who has been kept from his family for five long years.
  
And yet, no matter how hard it may be to start meaningful negotiations under currentcircumstances, we must acknowledge that a failure to try is not an option. The status quo isunsustainable. And that is why on Thursday I stated publicly the principles that the UnitedStates believes can provide a foundation for negotiations toward an agreement to end theconflict and all claims -- the broad outlines of which have been known for many years, andhave been the template for discussions between the United States, Israel, and the Palestinianssince at least the Clinton administration.
I know that stating these principles -- on the issues of territory and security -- generatedsome controversy over the past few days. I wasn’t surprised. I know very well that the easything to do, particularly for a President preparing for reelection, is to avoid any controversy. Idon’t need Rahm to tell me that. Don’t need Axelrod to tell me that. But I said to PrimeMinister Netanyahu, I believe that the current situation in the Middle East does not allow forprocrastination. I also believe that real friends talk openly and honestly with one another. So Iwant to share with you some of what I said to the Prime Minister.
Here are the facts we all must confront. First, the number of Palestinians living west of theJordan River is growing rapidly and fundamentally reshaping the demographic realities of bothIsrael and the Palestinian Territories. This will make it harder and harder -- without a peacedeal -- to maintain Israel as both a Jewish state and a democratic state.
Second, technology will make it harder for Israel to defend itself in the absence of a genuinepeace.
Third, a new generation of Arabs is reshaping the region. A just and lasting peace can nolonger be forged with one or two Arab leaders.  Going forward, millions of Arab citizens haveto see that peace is possible for that peace to be sustained.
And just as the context has changed in the Middle East, so too has it been changing in theinternational community over the last several years. There’s a reason why the Palestinians arepursuing their interests at the United Nations. They recognize that there is an impatience withthe peace process, or the absence of one, not just in the Arab World -- in Latin America, inAsia, and in Europe. And that impatience is growing, and it’s already manifesting itself incapitals around the world.
And those are the facts. I firmly believe, and I repeated on Thursday, that peace cannot beimposed on the parties to the conflict. No vote at the United Nations will ever create anindependent Palestinian state. And the United States will stand up against efforts to singleIsrael out at the United Nations or in any international forum. Israel’s legitimacy is not amatter for debate. That is my commitment; that is my pledge to all of you.
  
Moreover, we know that peace demands a partner –- which is why I said that Israel cannot beexpected to negotiate with Palestinians who do not recognize its right to exist. And we willhold the Palestinians accountable for their actions and for their rhetoric.
But the march to isolate Israel internationally -- and the impulse of the Palestinians toabandon negotiations –- will continue to gain momentum in the absence of a credible peaceprocess and alternative. And for us to have leverage with the Palestinians, to have leveragewith the Arab States and with the international community, the basis for negotiations has tohold out the prospect of success. And so, in advance of a five-day trip to Europe in which theMiddle East will be a topic of acute interest, I chose to speak about what peace will require. 
There was nothing particularly original in my proposal; this basic framework for negotiationshas long been the basis for discussions among the parties, including previous U.S.administrations. Since questions have been raised, let me repeat what I actually said onThursday -- not what I was reported to have said. 
I said that the United States believes that negotiations should result in two states, withpermanent Palestinian borders with Israel, Jordan, and Egypt, and permanent Israeli borderswith Palestine. The borders of Israel and Palestine should be based on the 1967 lines withmutually agreed swaps -- so that secure and recognized borders are established for bothstates. The Palestinian people must have the right to govern themselves, and reach theirpotential, in a sovereign and contiguous state. As for security, every state has the right to self-defense, and Israel must be able to defenditself –- by itself -– against any threat. Provisions must also be robust enough to prevent aresurgence of terrorism, to stop the infiltration of weapons, and to provide effective bordersecurity. And a full and phased withdrawal of Israeli military forces should be coordinated withthe assumption of Palestinian security responsibility in a sovereign and non-militarizedstate. And the duration of this transition period must be agreed, and the effectiveness ofsecurity arrangements must be demonstrated.
Now, that is what I said. And it was my reference to the 1967 lines -- with mutually agreedswaps -- that received the lion’s share of the attention, including just now. And since myposition has been misrepresented several times, let me reaffirm what “1967 lines withmutually agreed swaps” means.
By definition, it means that the parties themselves -– Israelis and Palestinians -– willnegotiate a border that is different than the one that existed on June 4, 1967. That’s whatmutually agreed-upon swaps means. It is a well-known formula to all who have worked onthis issue for a generation. It allows the parties themselves to account for the changes thathave taken place over the last 44 years. It allows the parties themselves to take account ofthose changes, including the new demographic realities on the ground, and the needs of bothsides.
  
The ultimate goal is two states for two people: Israel as a Jewish state and the homeland forthe Jewish people -- and the State of Palestine as the homeland for the Palestinian people --each state in joined self-determination, mutual recognition, and peace.
If there is a controversy, then, it’s not based in substance. What I did on Thursday was to saypublicly what has long been acknowledged privately. I’ve done so because we can’t afford towait another decade, or another two decades, or another three decades to achieve peace. Theworld is moving too fast. The world is moving too fast. The extraordinary challenges facingIsrael will only grow. Delay will undermine Israel’s security and the peace that the Israelipeople deserve.
Now, I know that some of you will disagree with this assessment. I respect that. And as fellowAmericans and friends of Israel, I know we can have this discussion. Ultimately, it is the rightand the responsibility of the Israeli government to make the hard choices that are necessaryto protect a Jewish and democratic state for which so many generations have sacrificed. Andas a friend of Israel, I’m committed to doing our part to see that this goal is realized. And Iwill call not just on Israel, but on the Palestinians, on the Arab States, and the internationalcommunity to join us in this effort, because the burden of making hard choices must not beIsrael’s alone.
But even as we do all that’s necessary to ensure Israel’s security, even as we are clear-eyedabout the difficult challenges before us, and even as we pledge to stand by Israel throughwhatever tough days lie ahead, I hope we do not give up on that vision of peace. For if historyteaches us anything, if the story of Israel teaches us anything, it is that with courage andresolve, progress is possible. Peace is possible.
The Talmud teaches us that, "So long as a person still has life, they should never abandonfaith." And that lesson seems especially fitting today.
For so long as there are those across the Middle East and beyond who are standing up for thelegitimate rights and freedoms which have been denied by their governments, the UnitedStates will never abandon our support for those rights that are universal.     And so long as there are those who long for a better future, we will never abandon our pursuitof a just and lasting peace that ends this conflict with two states living side by side in peaceand security. This is not idealism; it is not naïveté. It is a hard-headed recognition that agenuine peace is the only path that will ultimately provide for a peaceful Palestine as thehomeland of the Palestinian people and a Jewish state of Israel as the homeland of the Jewishpeople. That is my goal, and I look forward to continuing to work with AIPAC to achieve thatgoal.
Thank you. God bless you. God bless Israel, and God bless the United States of America.Thank you.
