Thank you, Tim, for your hard work on this issue and on our economic recovery. 
The economic crisis we face is unlike any we've seen in our lifetime. It's a crisis of fallingconfidence and rising debt, of widely distributed risk and narrowly concentrated reward; acrisis written in the fine print of sub-prime mortgages, on the ledger lines of once mightyfinancial institutions, and on the pink slips that have upended the lives of so many peopleacross this country and cost the economy 2.6 million jobs last year alone.We know that even if we do everything that we should, this crisis was years in the making,and it will take more than weeks or months to turn things around.But make no mistake: A failure to act, and act now, will turn crisis into a catastrophe andguarantee a longer recession, a less robust recovery, and a more uncertain future. Millionsmore jobs will be lost. More businesses will be shuttered. More dreams will be deferred.And that's why I feel such a sense of urgency about the economic recovery and reinvestmentplan that is before Congress today. With it, we can save or create more than three millionjobs, doing things that will strengthen our country for years to come. It's not merely aprescription for short-term spending -- it's a strategy for long-term economic growth in areaslike renewable energy and health care and education.Now, in the past few days I've heard criticisms that this plan is somehow wanting, and thesecriticisms echo the very same failed economic theories that led us into this crisis in the firstplace -- the notion that tax cuts alone will solve all our problems; that we can ignorefundamental challenges like energy independence and the high cost of health care; that we can somehow deal with this in a piecemeal fashion and still expect our economy and ourcountry to thrive.I reject those theories. And so did the American people when they went to the polls inNovember and voted resoundingly for change. So I urge members of Congress to act withoutdelay. No plan is perfect, and we should work to make it stronger. No one is more committedto making it stronger than me. But let's not make the perfect the enemy of the essential. Let'sshow people all over the country who are looking for leadership in this difficult time that weare equal to the task.At the same time, we know that this recovery and reinvestment plan is only the first part ofwhat we need to do to restore prosperity and secure our future. We also need a strong andviable financial system to keep credit flowing to businesses and families alike. And myadministration will do whatever it takes to restore our financial system. Our recovery dependson it. And so in the next week, Secretary Geithner will release a new strategy to get creditmoving again -- a strategy that will reflect some of the lessons of past mistakes while layingthe foundation of the future.But in order to restore trust in our financial system, we're going to have to do more than justput forward our plans. In order to restore trust, we've got to make certain that taxpayer fundsare not subsidizing excessive compensation packages on Wall Street.We all need to take responsibility. And this includes executives at major financial firms whoturned to the American people, hat in hand, when they were in trouble, even as they paidthemselves customary lavish bonuses. As I said last week, this is the height of irresponsibility.It's shameful. And that's exactly the kind of disregard of the costs and consequences of theiractions that brought about this crisis: a culture of narrow self-interest and short-term gain atthe expense of everything else.This is America. We don't disparage wealth. We don't begrudge anybody for achievingsuccess. And we certainly believe that success should be rewarded. But what gets peopleupset -- and rightfully so -- are executives being rewarded for failure, especially when thoserewards are subsidized by U.S. taxpayers, many of whom are having a tough timethemselves.For top executives to award themselves these kinds of compensation packages in the midst ofthis economic crisis isn't just bad taste -- it's bad strategy -- and I will not tolerate it asPresident. We're going to be demanding some restraint in exchange for federal aid -- so thatwhen firms seek new federal dollars, we won't find them up to the same old tricks.As part of the reforms we're announcing today, top executives at firms receiving extraordinaryhelp from U.S. taxpayers will have their compensation capped at 500,000 dollars -- a fractionof the salaries that have been reported recently. And if these executives receive any additionalcompensation, it will come in the form of stock that can't be paid up until taxpayers are paidback for their assistance.

Companies receiving federal aid are going to have to disclose publicly all the perks andluxuries bestowed upon senior executives, and provide an explanation to the taxpayers and toshareholders as to why these expenses are justified. And we're putting a stop to these kindsof massive severance packages we've all read about with disgust; we're taking the air out ofgolden parachutes.We're asking these firms to take responsibility, to recognize the nature of this crisis and theirrole in it. We believe that what we've laid out should be viewed as fair and embraced as basiccommon sense.And finally, these guidelines we're putting in place are only the beginning of a long-termeffort. We're going to examine the ways in which the means and manner of executivecompensation have contributed to a reckless culture and a quarter-by-quarter mentality thatin turn helped to wrought havoc in our financial system. We're going to be taking a look atbroader reforms so that executives are compensated for sound risk management, andrewarded for growth measured over years, not just days or weeks. We all have to pull together and take our share of responsibility. That's true here inWashington. That's true on Wall Street. The American people are carrying a huge burden as aresult of this economic crisis: bearing the brunt of its effects as well as the cost ofextraordinary measures we're taking to address them. The American people expect anddemand that we pursue policies that reflect the reality of this crisis -- and that will preventthese kinds of crises from occurring again in the future.Thank you very much.