Please have a seat, everybody.  Good morning.  I thought it might make sense to take somequestions this week, as my first term comes to an end.
It’s been a busy and productive four years.  And I expect the same for the next four years.  Iintend to carry out the agenda that I campaigned on -- an agenda for new jobs, newopportunity, and new security for the middle class. 
Right now, our economy is growing, and our businesses are creating new jobs, so we arepoised for a good year if we make smart decisions and sound investments -- and as long asWashington politics don’t get in the way of America’s progress.
As I said on the campaign, one component to growing our economy and broadeningopportunity for the middle class is shrinking our deficits in a balanced and responsible way. And for nearly two years now, I’ve been fighting for such a plan -- one that would reduce ourdeficits by $4 trillion over the next decade, which would stabilize our debt and our deficit in asustainable way for the next decade.  That would be enough not only to stop the growth ofour debt relative to the size of our economy, but it would make it manageable so it doesn’tcrowd out the investments we need to make in people and education and job training andscience and medical research -- all the things that help us grow.
  
Now, step by step, we’ve made progress towards that goal.  Over the past two years, I’vesigned into law about $1.4 trillion in spending cuts.  Two weeks ago, I signed into law morethan $600 billion in new revenue by making sure the wealthiest Americans begin to pay theirfair share.  When you add the money that we’ll save in interest payments on the debt, alltogether that adds up to a total of about $2.5 trillion in deficit reduction over the past twoyears -- not counting the $400 billion already saved from winding down the wars in Iraq andAfghanistan. 
So we've made progress.  We are moving towards our ultimate goal of getting to a $4 trillionreduction.  And there will be more deficit reduction when Congress decides what to do aboutthe $1.2 trillion in automatic spending cuts that have been pushed off until next month. 
The fact is, though, we can’t finish the job of deficit reduction through spending cuts alone. The cuts we’ve already made to priorities other than Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security anddefense mean that we spend on everything from education to public safety less as a share ofour economy than it has -- than has been true for a generation.  And that’s not a recipe forgrowth.
So we’ve got to do more both to stabilize our finances over the medium and long term, butalso spur more growth in the short term.  I’ve said I’m open to making modest adjustments toprograms like Medicare to protect them for future generations.  I’ve also said that we needmore revenue through tax reform by closing loopholes in our tax code for the wealthiestAmericans.  If we combine a balanced package of savings from spending on health care andrevenues from closing loopholes, we can solve the deficit issue without sacrificing ourinvestments in things like education that are going to help us grow.
It turns out the American people agree with me.  They listened to an entire year’s debate overthis issue, and they made a clear decision about the approach they prefer.  They don’t thinkit’s fair, for example, to ask a senior to pay more for his or her health care, or a scientist toshut down lifesaving research so that a multimillionaire investor can pay less in tax rates thana secretary.  They don’t think it’s smart to protect endless corporate loopholes and tax breaksfor the wealthiest Americans rather than rebuild our roads and our schools, invest in ourworkers’ skills, or help manufacturers bring jobs back to America.  So they want us to get ourbooks in order in a balanced way, where everybody pulls their weight, everyone does theirpart.
That's what I want as well.  That's what I've proposed.  And we can get it done, but we'regoing to have to make sure that people are looking at this in a responsible way rather thanjust through the lens of politics.
Now, the other congressionally imposed deadline coming up is the so-called debt ceiling --something most Americans hadn’t even heard of before two years ago.  I want to be clearabout this.  The debt ceiling is not a question of authorizing more spending.
  
Raising the debt ceiling does not authorize more spending.  It simply allows the country to payfor spending that Congress has already committed to.  These are bills that have already beenracked up and we need to pay them. 
So while I’m willing to compromise and find common ground over how to reduce our deficits,America cannot afford another debate with this Congress about whether or not they shouldpay the bills they’ve already racked up. 
If congressional Republicans refuse to pay America’s bills on time, Social Security checks andveterans’ benefits will be delayed.  We might not be able to pay our troops, or honor ourcontracts with small business owners.  Food inspectors, air traffic controllers, specialists whotrack down loose nuclear material wouldn’t get their paychecks.  Investors around the worldwill ask if the United States of America is, in fact, a safe bet.  Markets could go haywire. Interest rates would spike for anybody who borrows money -- every homeowner with amortgage, every student with a college loan, every small business owner who wants to growand hire.  It would be a self-inflicted wound on the economy.  It would slow down our growth,might tip us into recession, and ironically, would probably increase our deficit. 
So to even entertain the idea of this happening -- of the United States of America not payingits bills -- is irresponsible.  It’s absurd.  As the Speaker said two years ago, it would be -- andI'm quoting Speaker Boehner now -- “a financial disaster, not only for us, but for theworldwide economy.” 
So we've got to pay our bills.  And Republicans in Congress have two choices here:  They canact responsibly, and pay America’s bills; or they can act irresponsibly, and put Americathrough another economic crisis.  But they will not collect a ransom in exchange for notcrashing the American economy.  The financial well-being of the American people is notleverage to be used.  The full faith and credit of the United States of America is not abargaining chip. 
And they better choose quickly, because time is running short.  The last time Republicans inCongress even flirted with this idea, our AAA credit rating was downgraded for the first time inour history; our businesses created the fewest jobs of any month in nearly the past threeyears; and, ironically, the whole fiasco actually added to the deficit. 
So it shouldn’t be surprising, given all this talk, that the American people think Washington ishurting, rather than helping, the country at the moment.  They see their representativesconsumed with partisan brinksmanship over paying our bills, while they overwhelmingly wantus to focus on growing the economy and creating more jobs. 
So let’s finish this debate.  Let’s give our businesses and the world the certainty that oureconomy and our reputation are still second to none.  We pay our bills.  We handle ourbusiness. And then we can move on -- because America has a lot to do.
  
We’ve got to create more jobs.  We've got to boost the wages of those who have work.  We’vegot to reach for energy independence. We've got to reform our immigration system.  We’vegot to give our children the best education possible, and we've got to do everything we can toprotect them from the horrors of gun violence. 
And let me say I’m grateful to Vice President Biden for his work on this issue of gun violenceand for his proposals, which I'm going to be reviewing today and I will address in the next fewdays and I intend to vigorously pursue.
So, with that, I'm going to take some questions.  And I'm going to start with Julie Pace of AP. And I want to congratulate Julie for this new, important job.  
Question:  Thank you very much.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:   I wanted to ask about gun violence.  Today marks the one-year -- or one-monthanniversary of the shooting in Newtown, which seemed to generate some momentum forreinstating the assault weapons ban.  But there’s been fresh opposition to that ban from theNRA.  And even Harry Reid has said that he questions whether it could pass Congress.  Giventhat, how hard will you push for an assault weapons ban?  And if one cannot pass Congress,what other measures would need to be included in a broad package in order to curb gunviolence successfully?
President Obama:  Well, as I said, the Vice President and a number of members of myCabinet went through a very thorough process over the last month, meeting with a lot ofstakeholders in this including the NRA, listened to proposals from all quarters, and they’vepresented me now with a list of sensible, common-sense steps that can be taken to make surethat the kinds of violence we saw at Newtown doesn't happen again.
I’m going to be meeting with the Vice President today.  I expect to have a fuller presentationlater in the week to give people some specifics about what I think we need to do. 
My starting point is not to worry about the politics; my starting point is to focus on whatmakes sense, what works; what should we be doing to make sure that our children are safeand that we’re reducing the incidents of gun violence.  And I think we can do that in a sensibleway that comports with the Second Amendment. 
And then members of Congress I think are going to have to have a debate and examine theirown conscience -- because if, in fact -- and I believe this is true -- everybody across partylines was as deeply moved and saddened as I was by what happened in Newtown, then we’regoing to have to vote based on what we think is best.  We’re going to have to come up withanswers that set politics aside.  And that's what I expect Congress to do.
  
But what you can count is, is that the things that I’ve said in the past -- the belief that wehave to have stronger background checks, that we can do a much better job in terms ofkeeping these magazine clips with high capacity out of the hands of folks who shouldn’t havethem, an assault weapons ban that is meaningful -- that those are things I continue to believemake sense. 
Will all of them get through this Congress?  I don’t know.  But what’s uppermost in my mind ismaking sure that I’m honest with the American people and with members of Congress aboutwhat I think will work, what I think is something that will make a difference.  And to repeatwhat I’ve said earlier -- if there is a step we can take that will save even one child from whathappened in Newtown, we should take that step.
Question:  Can a package be discussed to allow an assault weapons ban?
President Obama:  I’ll present the details later in the week.
Chuck Todd, NBC.
Question:  Thank you, sir.  As you know, the Senate Democrats, Harry Reid sent you a letterbegging you, essentially, to take -- consider some sort of executive action on this debt ceilingissue.  I know you’ve said you’re not negotiating on it.  Your administration has ruled out thevarious ideas that have been out there -- the 14th Amendment.  But just this morning, one ofthe House Democratic leaders, Jim Clyburn, asked you to use the 14th Amendment and evensaid, sometimes that’s what it takes.  He brought up the Emancipation Proclamation as sayingit took executive action when Congress wouldn’t act, and he compared the debt ceiling tothat.  So are you considering a plan B, and if not, why not?
President Obama:  Well, Chuck, the issue here is whether or not America pays its bills.  Weare not a deadbeat nation.  And so there’s a very simple solution to this:  Congress authorizesus to pay our bills. 
Now, if the House and the Senate want to give me the authority so that they don’t have totake these tough votes, if they want to put the responsibility on me to raise the debt ceiling,I’m happy to take it.  Mitch McConnell, the Republican Leader in the Senate, had a proposallike that last year, and I’m happy to accept it.  But if they want to keep this responsibility,then they need to go ahead and get it done. 
And there are no magic tricks here.  There are no loopholes. There are no easy outs.  This is amatter of Congress authorizes spending.  They order me to spend.  They tell me, you need tofund our Defense Department at such and such a level; you need to send out Social Securitychecks; you need to make sure that you are paying to care for our veterans.  They lay all thisout for me because they have the spending power.  And so I am required by law to go aheadand pay these bills. 
  
Separately, they also have to authorize the raising of the debt ceiling in order to make surethat those bills are paid.  And so, what Congress can't do is tell me to spend X, and then say,but we're not going to give you the authority to go ahead and pay the bills. 
And I just want to repeat -- because I think sometimes the American people, understandably,aren't following all the debates here in Washington -- raising the debt ceiling does notauthorize us to spend more.  All it does is say that America will pay its bills.  And we are not adead-beat nation.  And the consequences of us not paying our bills, as I outlined in myopening statement, would be disastrous. 
So I understand the impulse to try to get around this in a simple way.  But there's one way toget around this.  There's one way to deal with it.  And that is for Congress to authorize me topay for those items of spending that they have already authorized.
And the notion that Republicans in the House, or maybe some Republicans in the Senate,would suggest that “in order for us to get our way on our spending priorities, that we wouldrisk the full faith and credit of the United States” -- that I think is not what the Foundersintended.  That's not how I think most Americans think our democracy should work.  They'vegot a point of view; Democrats in Congress have a point of view.  They need to sit down andwork out a compromise.
Question:  You just outlined an entire rationale for why this can't happen.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:  And if -- then if -- and you're not negotiating on the debt ceiling.
President Obama:  Yes.
Question:  So you're not negotiating and they say you have to negotiate, and you're notconsidering another plan B, then do you just wait it out and we do go -- we do see all thesethings happen?
President Obama:  Well look, Chuck, there are -- there's a pretty straightforward way ofdoing this and that is to set the debt ceiling aside, we pay our bills, and then we have avigorous debate about how we're going to do further deficit reduction in a balanced way.
Keep in mind that what we've heard from some Republicans in both the House and the Senateis that they will only increase the debt ceiling by the amount of spending cuts that they're ableto push through and -- in order to replace the automatic spending cuts of the sequester --that's $1.2 trillion.  Say it takes another trillion or trillion-two to get us through one moreyear, they'd have to identify $2.5 trillion in cuts just to get the debt ceiling extended to nextyear -- $2.5 trillion. 
  
They can't even -- Congress has not been able to identify $1.2 trillion in cuts that they'rehappy with.  Because these same Republicans say they don’t want to cut defense; they'veclaimed that they don't want to gut Medicare or harm the vulnerable.  But the truth of thematter is that you can't meet their own criteria without drastically cutting Medicare, or havingan impact on Medicaid, or affecting our defense spending. So the math just doesn’t add up.
Now, here’s what would work.  What would work would be for us to say we’ve already doneclose to $2 trillion in deficit reduction, and if you add the interest that we won’t be payingbecause of less spending and increased revenue, it adds up to about $2.5 trillion.  Theconsensus is we need about $4 trillion to stabilize our debt and our deficit, which means weneed about $1.5 trillion more.  The package that I offered to Speaker Boehner before we --before the New Year would achieve that.  We were actually fairly close in terms of arriving atthat number.
So if the goal is to make sure that we are being responsible about our debt and our deficit, ifthat’s the conversation we’re having, I’m happy to have that conversation.  And by closingsome additional loopholes through tax reform -- which Speaker Boehner has acknowledgedcan raise money in a sensible way -- and by doing some additional cuts, including makingsure that we are reducing our health care spending, which is the main driver of our deficits,we can arrive at a package that gets this thing done. 
I’m happy to have that conversation.  What I will not do is to have that negotiation with a gunat the head of the American people -- the threat that “unless we get our way, unless you gutMedicare or Medicaid, or otherwise slash things that the American people don’t believe shouldbe slashed, that we’re going to threaten to wreck the entire economy.”  That is not howhistorically this has been done.  That’s not how we’re going to do it this time.
Question:  No plan B?  You're not searching for any other --
President Obama:  Chuck, what I’m saying to you is that there is no simpler solution, noready, credible solution, other than Congress either give me the authority to raise the debtceiling, or exercise the responsibility that they have kept for themselves and raise the debtceiling.  Because this is about paying your bills.
Everybody here understands this.  I mean, this is not a complicated concept.  You don’t go outto dinner and then eat all you want, and then leave without paying the check.  And if you do,you’re breaking the law.  And Congress should think about it the same way that the Americanpeople do.  You don’t -- now, if Congress wants to have a debate about maybe we shouldn’tgo out to dinner next time, maybe we should go to a more modest restaurant, that’s fine. That’s a debate that we should have.  But you don’t say, in order for me to control myappetites, I’m going to not pay the people who already provided me services, people whoalready lent me the money.  That’s not showing any discipline.  All that’s doing is not meetingyour obligations.  You can’t do that.
  
And that’s not a credible way to run this government.  We’ve got to stop lurching from crisisto crisis to crisis, when there’s this clear path ahead of us that simply requires somediscipline, some responsibility and some compromise.  That’s where we need to go.  That’show this needs to work.
Major Garrett.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  As you well know, sir, finding votes for the debt ceilingcan sometimes be complicated.You, yourself, as a member of the Senate, voted against a debt ceiling increase.  And inprevious aspects of American history -- President Reagan in 1985, President George HerbertWalker Bush in 1990, President Clinton in 1997 -- all signed deficit reduction deals that werecontingent upon or in the context of raising the debt ceiling.  You, yourself, four times havedone that.  Three times, those were related to deficit reduction or budget maneuvers. 
What Chuck and I and I think many people are curious about is this new, adamant desire onyour part not to negotiate, when that seems to conflict with the entire history in the modernera of American Presidents and the debt ceiling, and your own history on the debt ceiling. And doesn’t that suggest that we are going to go into a default situation because no one istalking to each other about how to resolve this?
President Obama:  Well, no, Major, I think if you look at the history, getting votes for thedebt ceiling is always difficult, and budgets in this town are always difficult.  I went throughthis just last year.  But what’s different is we never saw a situation as we saw last year inwhich certain groups in Congress took such an absolutist position that we came within a fewdays of defaulting.  And the fact of the matter is, is that we have never seen the debt ceilingused in this fashion, where the notion was, you know what, we might default unless we get100 percent of what we want.  That hasn’t happened.
Now, as I indicated before, I’m happy to have a conversation about how we reduce ourdeficits further in a sensible way.  Although one thing I want to point out is that the Americanpeople are also concerned about how we grow our economy, how we put people back to work,how we make sure that we finance our workers getting properly trained and our schools aregiving our kids the education we deserve.  There’s a whole growth agenda which will reduceour deficits that’s important as well.
But what you’ve never seen is the notion that has been presented, so far at least, by theRepublicans that deficit reduction -- we’ll only count spending cuts; that we will raise thedeficit -- or the debt ceiling dollar for dollar on spending cuts.  There are a whole set of rulesthat have been established that are impossible to meet without doing severe damage to theeconomy. 
  
And so what we’re not going to do is put ourselves in a position where in order to pay forspending that we’ve already incurred, that our two options are we’re either going toprofoundly hurt the economy and hurt middle-class families and hurt seniors and hurt kidswho are trying to go to college, or, alternatively, we’re going to blow up the economy.  We’renot going to do that.
Question:  [Inaudible] -- open to a one-to-three-month extension to the debt ceiling --whatever Congress sends you, you’re okay with it?
President Obama:  No, not whatever Congress sends me.  They’re going to have to send mesomething that’s sensible.  And we shouldn’t be doing this --
Question: -- [inaudible] --
President Obama:  -- and we shouldn’t be doing this on a one to three-month timeframe. Why would we do that?  This is the United States of America, Major.  What, we can’t manageour affairs in such a way that we pay our bills and we provide some certainty in terms of howwe pay our bills? 
Look, I don’t think anybody would consider my position unreasonable here.  I have --
Question:  But why does it presuppose the need to negotiate and talk about this on a dailybasis?  Because if default is the biggest threat to the economy, why not talk about it --
President Obama:  Major, I am happy to have a conversation about how we reduce ourdeficits.  I’m not going to have a monthly or every-three-months conversation about whetheror not we pay our bills.  Because that in and of itself does severe damage.  Even the threat ofdefault hurts our economy.  It’s hurting our economy as we speak.  We shouldn’t be havingthat debate. 
If we want to have a conversation about how to reduce our deficit, let’s have that.  We’vebeen having that for the last two years.  We just had an entire campaign about it.  And by theway, the American people agreed with me that we should reduce our deficits in a balancedway that also takes into account the need for us to grow this economy and put people back towork.
And despite that conversation, and despite the election results, the position that’s been takenon the part of some House Republicans is that, “no, we’ve got to do it our way, and if wedon’t, we simply won’t pay America’s bills.”  Well, that can’t be a position that is sustainableover time.  It’s not one that's good for the economy now.  It's certainly not going to be thekind of precedent that I want to establish not just for my presidency, but for futurePresidents, even if it was on the other side.
  
Democrats don't like voting for the debt ceiling when a Republican is President, and yet you --but you never saw a situation in which Democrats suggested somehow that we would goahead and default if we didn't get 100 percent of our way.  That's just not how it's supposedto work. 
Jon Karl.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  On the issue of guns, given how difficult it will be --some would say impossible -- to get any gun control measure passed through this Congress,what are you willing or able to do, using the powers of your presidency, to act withoutCongress?  And I'd also like to know, what do you make of these long lines we're seeing atgun shows and gun stores all around the country?  I mean, even in Connecticut, applicationsfor guns are up since the shooting in Newtown.
President Obama:  Well, my understanding is the Vice President is going to provide a rangeof steps that we can take to reduce gun violence.  Some of them will require legislation. Some of them I can accomplish through executive action.  And so I'll be reviewing thosetoday.  And as I said, I'll speak in more detail to what we're going to go ahead and proposelater in the week.
But I'm confident that there are some steps that we can take that don't require legislation andthat are within my authority as President.  And where you get a step that has the opportunityto reduce the possibility of gun violence then I want to go ahead and take it. 
Question:  Any idea of what kind of steps?
President Obama:  Well, I think, for example, how we are gathering data, for example, onguns that fall into the hands of criminals, and how we track that more effectively -- there maybe some steps that we can take administratively as opposed through legislation. 
As far as people lining up and purchasing more guns, I think that we've seen for some timenow that those who oppose any common-sense gun control or gun safety measures have apretty effective way of ginning up fear on the part of gun owners that somehow the federalgovernment is about to take all your guns away.  And there's probably an economic elementto that.  It obviously is good for business. 
But I think that those of us who look at this problem have repeatedly said that responsiblegun owners, people who have a gun for protection, for hunting, for sportsmanship, they don'thave anything to worry about.  The issue here is not whether or not we believe in the SecondAmendment.  The issue is, are there some sensible steps that we can take to make sure thatsomebody like the individual in Newtown can't walk into a school and gun down a bunch ofchildren in a shockingly rapid fashion.  And surely, we can do something about that. 
  
But part of the challenge that we confront is, is that even the slightest hint of some sensible,responsible legislation in this area fans this notion that somehow, here it comes andeverybody's guns are going to be taken away.  It's unfortunate, but that's the case.  And ifyou look at over the first four years of my administration, we’ve tried to tighten up andenforce some of the laws that were already on the books.  But it would be pretty hard toargue that somehow gun owners have had their rights infringed.
Question:  So you think this is an irrational fear that's driving all these people to go andstock up --
President Obama:  Excuse me?
Question:  Do you think this is an irrational fear --
President Obama:  Well, as I said, I think it's a fear that's fanned by those who are worriedabout the possibility of any legislation getting out there. 
Julianna Goldman.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I just want to come back to the debt ceiling, becausein the summer of 2011, you said that you wouldn't negotiate on the debt ceiling, and you did. Last year, you said that you wouldn't extend any of the Bush tax cuts for the wealthy, and youdid.  So as you say now that you're not going to negotiate on the debt ceiling this year, whyshould House Republicans take that seriously and think that if we get to the one-minute-to-
midnight scenario, that you're not going to back down?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, Julianna, let's take the example of this year and thefiscal cliff.  I didn't say that I would not have any conversations at all about extending theBush tax cuts.  What I said was we weren't going to extend Bush tax cuts for the wealthy --and we didn't.  Now, you can argue that during the campaign I said -- I set the criteria forwealthy at $250,000 and we ended up being at $400,000.  But the fact of the matter ismillionaires, billionaires are paying significantly more in taxes, just as I said.  So from thestart, my concern was making sure that we had a tax code that was fair and that protectedthe middle class, and my biggest priority was making sure that middle-class taxes did not goup. 
The difference between this year and 2011 is the fact that we've already made $1.2 trillion incuts.  And at the time, I indicated that there were cuts that we could sensibly make thatwould not damage our economy, would not impede growth.  I said at the time I think weshould pair it up with revenue in order to have an overall balanced package.  But my ownbudget reflected cuts in discretionary spending.  My own budget reflected the cuts thatneeded to be made, and we've made those cuts. 
  
Now, the challenge going forward is that we've now made some big cuts, and if we're going todo further deficit reduction, the only way to do it is in a balanced and responsible way. 
The alternative is for us to go ahead and cut commitments that we've made on things likeMedicare, or Social Security, or Medicaid, and for us to fundamentally change commitmentsthat we've made to make sure that seniors don't go into poverty, or that children who aredisabled are properly cared for.  For us to change that contract we've made with the Americanpeople rather than look at options like closing loopholes for corporations that they don't need,that points to a long-term trend in which we have fundamentally, I think, undermined whatpeople expect out of this government -- which is that parties sit down, they negotiate, theycompromise, but they also reflect the will of the American people; that you don't have onenarrow faction that is able to simply dictate 100 percent of what they want all the time orotherwise threaten that we destroy the American economy.
Another way of putting it is we've got to break the habit of negotiating through crisis over andover again.  And now is as good of a time as any, at the start of my second term, because ifwe continue down this path, then there's really no stopping the principle.  I mean, literally --even in divided government, even where we've got a Democratic President and a DemocraticSenate, that a small group in the House of Representatives could simply say every twomonths, every three months, every six months, every year, we are going to more and morechange the economy in ways that we prefer, despite strong objections of Americans all acrossthe country, or otherwise we're going to have America not pay its bills.  And that is no way forus to do business.
And by the way, I would make the same argument if it was a Republican President and aRepublican Senate and you had a handful of Democrats who were suggesting that we aregoing to hijack the process and make sure that either we get our way 100 percent of the time,or otherwise we are going to default on America’s obligations.
Question:  [Inaudible] -- line in the sand negotiating, how is that [inaudible] to theeconomy?
President Obama:  No, no, look, what I’ve said is that I’m happy to have a conversationabout deficit reduction --
Question:  So you technically are willing to negotiate?
President Obama:  No, Julianna, look, this is pretty straightforward.  Either Congress paysits bills or it doesn't.  Now, if -- and they want to keep this responsibility; if John Boehner andMitch McConnell think that they can come up with a plan that somehow meets their criteriathat they’ve set for why they will -- when they will raise the debt ceiling, they're free to goahead and try.  But the proposals that they’ve put forward in order to accomplish that -- onlyby cutting spending -- means cuts to things like Medicare and education that the Americanpeople profoundly reject.
  
Now, if they think that they can get that through Congress, then they're free to try.  But Ithink that a better way of doing this is go ahead and say, we’re going to pay our bills.  Thequestion now is how do we actually get our deficit in a manageable, sustainable way?  Andthat's a conversation I’m happy to have.
All right.  Matt Spetalnick.
Question:  Thank you, sir.  You’ve spoken extensively about the debt ceiling debate, butsome Republicans have further said that they're willing to allow a government shutdown totake place rather than put off deep spending cuts.  Are you prepared to allow the governmentto grind to a halt if you disagree with the spending cut proposals they put forth?  And who doyou think the American people would blame if that came to pass?
President Obama:  Well, ultimately, Congress makes the decisions about whether or not wespend money and whether or not we keep this government open.  And if the Republicans inCongress have made a decision that they want to shut down the government in order to gettheir way then they have the votes at least in the House of Representatives, probably, to dothat. 
I think that would be a mistake.  I think it would be profoundly damaging to our economy.  Ithink it would actually add to our deficit because it will impede growth.  I think it’sshortsighted.  But they’re elected representatives, and folks put them into those positions andthey’re going to have to make a decision about that.  And I don’t -- I suspect that theAmerican people would blame all of Washington for not being able to get its act together. 
But the larger issue here has to do with what is it that we’re trying to accomplish.  Are wetrying to reduce the deficit? Because if we’re trying to reduce the deficit, then we can shape abipartisan plan to reduce the deficit.  I mean, is that really our objective?  Our concern is thatwe’re spending more than we take in, and if that’s the case, then there’s a way of balancingthat out so that we take in more money in increasing revenue and we reduce spending.  Andthere’s a recipe for getting that done.
And in the conversations that I had with Speaker Boehner before the end of the year, wecame pretty close -- a few hundred billion dollars separating us when stretched over a 10-yearperiod, that’s not a lot. 
But it seems as if what’s motivating and propelling at this point some of the HouseRepublicans is more than simply deficit reduction.  They have a particular vision about whatgovernment should and should not do.  So they are suspicious about government’scommitments, for example, to make sure that seniors have decent health care as they getolder. They have suspicions about Social Security.  They have suspicions about whethergovernment should make sure that kids in poverty are getting enough to eat, or whether weshould be spending money on medical research.  So they’ve got a particular view of whatgovernment should do and should be. 
  
And that view was rejected by the American people when it was debated during thepresidential campaign.  I think every poll that’s out there indicates that the American peopleactually think our commitment to Medicare or to education is really important, and that’ssomething that we should look at as a last resort in terms of reducing the deficit, and it makesa lot more sense for us to close, for example, corporate loopholes before we go to putting abigger burden on students or seniors. 
But if the House Republicans disagree with that and they want to shut down the governmentto see if they can get their way on it, that’s their prerogative.  That’s how the system is setup.  It will damage our economy. 
The government is a big part of this economy, and it’s interesting that a lot of times you havepeople who recognize that when it comes to defense spending -- some of the same folks whosay we’ve got to cut spending, or complain that government jobs don’t do anything, when itcomes to that defense contractor in their district, they think, wow, this is a pretty importantpart of the economy in my district and we shouldn’t stop spending on that.  Let’s just makesure we’re not spending on those other folks.
Question:  -- find agreement with Republicans on this and --
President Obama:  Look, my hope is, is that common sense prevails.  That’s always mypreference.  And I think that would the preference of the American people, and that’s whatwould be good for the economy.
So let me just repeat:  If the issue is deficit reduction, getting our deficits sustainable overtime, getting our debt in a sustainable place, then Democrats and Republicans in Congress willhave a partner with me. 
We can achieve that, and we can achieve it fairly quickly.  I mean, we know what thenumbers are.  We know what needs to be done.  We know what a balanced approach wouldtake.  We’ve already done probably more than half of the deficit reduction we need to stabilizethe debt and the deficit.  There’s probably been more pain and drama in getting there than weneeded.  And so finishing the job shouldn’t be that difficult -- if everybody comes to theconversation with an open mind, and if we recognize that there are some things, like notpaying our bills, that should be out of bounds.
All right.  I’m going to take one last question.  Jackie Calmes.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Yes.
  
Question:  I’d like to ask you, now that you’ve reached the end of your first term, startingyour second, about a couple of criticisms -- one that’s longstanding, another more recent. The longstanding one seems to have become a truism of sorts that you’re -- you and yourstaff are too insular, that you don’t socialize enough.  And the second, the more recentcriticism is that your team taking shape isn’t diverse -- isn’t as diverse as it could be, or evenwas, in terms of getting additional voices, gender, race, ethnic diversity.  So I’d like you toaddress both of those.
President Obama:  Sure.  Let me take the second one first.  I’m very proud that in the firstfour years we had as diverse, if not more diverse, a White House and a Cabinet than any inhistory.  And I intend to continue that, because it turns out that when you look for the verybest people, given the incredible diversity of this country, you’re going to end up with adiverse staff and a diverse team.  And that very diversity helps to create more effectivepolicymaking and better decision-making for me, because it brings different perspectives tothe table. 
So if you think about my first four years, the person who probably had the most influence onmy foreign policy was a woman. The people who were in charge of moving forward my mostimportant domestic initiative, health care, were women.  The person in charge of ourhomeland security was a woman.  My two appointments to the Supreme Court were women,and 50 percent of my White House staff were women.  So I think people should expect thatthat record will be built upon during the next four years.
Now, what, I’ve made four appointments so far?  And one women -- admittedly, a high-profileone -- is leaving the -- has already left the administration, and I have made a replacement.But I would just suggest that everybody kind of wait until they’ve seen all my appointments,who’s in the White House staff and who’s in my Cabinet before they rush to judgment.
Question: [Inaudible] -- the big three.
President Obama:  Yes, but I guess what I’m saying, Jackie, is that I think until you’ve seenwhat my overall team looks like, it’s premature to assume that somehow we’re goingbackwards.  We’re not going backwards, we’re going forward.
With respect to this “truism” about me not socializing enough and patting folks on the backand all that stuff, most people who know me know I’m a pretty friendly guy.  And I like a goodparty. And the truth is that when I was in the Senate, I had great relationships over there,and up until the point that I became President this was not an accusation that you heard veryfrequently. 
I think that really what’s gone on in terms of some of the paralysis here in Washington ordifficulties in negotiations just have to do with some very stark differences in terms of policy,some very sharp differences in terms of where we stand on issues.
  
And if you think about, let's say, myself and Speaker Boehner, I like Speaker Boehnerpersonally, and when we went out and played golf we had a great time.  But that didn't get adeal done in 2011.  When I'm over here at the congressional picnic and folks are coming upand taking pictures with their family, I promise you, Michelle and I are very nice to them andwe have a wonderful time.  But it doesn't prevent them from going onto the floor of the Houseand blasting me for being a big-spending socialist.
And the reason that, in many cases, Congress votes the way they do, or talks the way theytalk, or takes positions in negotiations that they take doesn't have to do with me.  It has to dowith the imperatives that they feel in terms of their own politics -- right?  They're worriedabout their district.  They're worried about what's going on back home. 
I think there are a lot of Republicans at this point that feel that given how much energy hasbeen devoted in some of the media that's preferred by Republican constituencies to demonizeme, that it doesn't look real good socializing with me.  Charlie Crist down in Florida I thinktestifies to that.  And I think a lot of folks say, well, if we look like we're being too cooperativeor too chummy with the President that might cause us problems.  That might be an excuse forus to get a challenge from somebody in a primary.
So that tends to be the challenge.  I promise you, we invite folks from Congress over here allthe time.  And when they choose to come, I enjoy their company.  Sometimes they don'tchoose to come, and that has to do with the fact that I think they don't consider the opticsuseful for them politically.  And, ultimately, the way we're going to get stuff done -- personalrelationships are important, and obviously I can always do a better job, and the nice thing is,is that now that my girls are getting older, they don't want to spend that much time with meanyway, so I'll be probably calling around, looking for somebody to play cards with me orsomething, because I'm getting kind of lonely in this big house.  So maybe a whole bunch ofmembers of the House Republican caucus want to come over and socialize more. 
But my suspicion is getting the issues resolved that we just talked about, the big stuff --whether or not we get sensible laws passed to prevent gun violence, whether or not Americais paying its bills, whether or not we get immigration reform done  -- all that's going to bedetermined largely by where the respective parties stand on policy, and maybe mostimportantly, the attitude of the American people.
If the American people feel strongly about these issues and they push hard, and they rewardor don't reward members of Congress with their votes, if they reject sort of uncompromisingpositions or sharp partisanship or always looking out for the next election, and they rewardfolks who are trying to find common ground, then I think you'll see behavior in Congresschange.  And that will be true whether I'm the life of the party or a stick in the mud.
Thank you very much, everybody.
