For our forces in Afghanistan, the Battle of Wanat was one of the most fierce of this entirewar.  Forty-eight Americans, along with their Afghan partners, were manning their small base,deep in a valley when they were attacked by some 200 insurgents. And those insurgentsseemed determined to overrun an even smaller post just outside the base -- an elevatedpatch of boulders and sandbags defended by just nine American soldiers. 
Soon, under the relentless fire, all nine of those men were wounded or killed.  Insurgentsbroke through the wire.  And that little post was on the verge of falling, giving the enemy aperch from which to devastate the base below.  Against that onslaught, one American held theline -- just 22 years old, nearly surrounded, bloodied but unbowed -- the soldier we recognizetoday with our nation’s highest military decoration, the Medal of Honor, Staff Sergeant RyanM. Pitts.
Now, I don’t want to embarrass Ryan, but the character he displayed that day was clearlyforged early.  I’m told that in kindergarten, when asked what he wanted to be when he grewup, he drew a picture of a soldier.  When he was in the 5th grade, his teacher sent home anote that described Ryan in words that would be familiar to all those who knew him today --Ryan, she wrote, is "a very special human being." 
In Ryan Pitts you see the humility and the loyalty that define America’s men and women inuniform.  Of this medal, he says, "It’s not mine alone.  It belongs to everybody who was therethat day because we did it together."  
  
So I want to welcome those who were there that day -- Ryan’s brothers in arms, and thosewho are going to be welcoming him into their ranks -- the members of the Medal of HonorSociety.  We are very proud of them and we are honored by the presence of the families ofour fallen heroes as well. 
We welcome Ryan’s family, many from New Hampshire, including his wonderful wife, Amy.  Ihave to take a pause because they are actually celebrating -- Ryan and Amy -- their secondanniversary today.  As Ryan put it, it’s going to be tough topping this one, as anniversariesgo.  But let me just give you a piece of advice as somebody who now has been married forover 20 years:  You should try.  I’m just saying don’t rest on your laurels after just two years.
We welcome their gorgeous son, one-year-old Lucas, who Ryan is beginning to teach a lovefor all things New England -- of course, the Red Sox and the Bruins and the Celtics and thePats.
I want you to try and imagine the extraordinary circumstances in which Ryan and his teamserved.  This was the summer of 2008, and this was a time when our forces in Afghanistanwere stretched thin and our troops were deployed to isolated outposts.  They had just arrivedin Wanat just days before and they were still building their very small base -- a handful ofarmored vehicles and fighting positions and foxholes and sandbags. 
Wanat, one report later concluded, had "significant vulnerabilities."  Parts of the village sat onhigher ground.  On every side, mountains soared 10,000 feet into the sky.  Heavy equipmentto help build their defenses was delayed.  In the 100-degree heat the soldiers ran low onwater.  And the aerial surveillance they were counting on was diverted away to othermissions.
Early that morning, in the pre-dawn darkness, they spotted several men up the mountains. But before Ryan and his team could take action, the entire valley erupted.  Machine gun fireand mortar and rocket-propelled grenades poured down from every direction.  And those 200insurgents were firing from ridges and from the village and from trees.  Down at the base, avehicle exploded -- scattering its missiles, back at our soldiers.  It was, said a soldier, "hell onEarth." 
Up at their tiny post, Ryan and his team were being pounded.  Almost instantly, every one ofthem was wounded.  Ryan was hit by shrapnel in the arm and both legs and was bleedingbadly.  Already, three American soldiers in that valley had fallen.  And then a fourth.
As the insurgents moved in, Ryan picked up a grenade, pulled the pin, and held that livegrenade -- for a moment, then another, then another -- finally hurling it so they couldn’tthrow it back.  And he did that again.  And he did it again. 
  
Unable to stand, Ryan pulled himself up on his knees and manned a machine gun.  Soldiersfrom the base below made a daring run, dodging bullets and explosions, and joined thedefense.  But now the enemy was inside the post -- so close they were throwing rocks at theAmericans, so close they came right up to the sandbags.  Eight American soldiers had nowfallen.  And Ryan Pitts was the only living soldier at that post.    
The enemy was so close Ryan could hear their voices.  He whispered into the radio he was theonly one left and was running out of ammo.  "I was going to die," he remembers, "and mademy peace with it."  And then he prepared to make a last stand.  Bleeding and barelyconscious, Ryan threw his last grenades.  He grabbed a grenade launcher and fired nearlystraight up, so the grenade came back down on the enemy just yards away.  One insurgentwas now right on top of the post, shooting down until another team of Americans showed upand drove him back.  As one of his teammates said, had it not been for Ryan Pitts, that post"almost certainly would have been overrun." 
Even with reinforcements, the battle was not over.  Another wave of rocket-propelledgrenades slammed into the post.  Nine American soldiers were now gone.  And still, thefighting raged. Ryan worked the radio, helping target the air strikes that were hitting "danger-
close" -- just yards away.  And with those strikes the tide of the battle began to turn. Eventually, the insurgents fell back.  Ryan and his fellow soldiers had held their ground. 
This medal, Ryan says, is an opportunity to tell "our" story.  "There was valor everywhere,"according to Ryan.  And so today we also pay tribute to all who served with such valor thatday.  Shielding their wounded buddies with their own bodies.  Picking up unexploded missileswith their hands and carrying them away.  Running through the gunfire to reinforce that post.Fighting through their injuries and never giving up.  Helicopter pilots and MEDEVAC crews whocame in under heavy fire.  Said one soldier, "Never in my career have I seen such bravery andsacrifice."
And so I would ask all those who served at Wanat -- on the ground and in the air -- to pleasestand, those of you who are here today.
Most of all, Ryan says he considers this medal "a memorial for the guys who didn’t comehome."  So today, we honor nine American soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for us all.
The son who "absorbed love like a sponge;" the expectant father whose dream would latercome true, a beautiful baby girl -- Specialist Sergio Abad.
The boy who dominated the soccer fields, and fell in love with motorcycles, and there in thatremote outpost took a direct hit in the helmet and kept on fighting -- Corporal JonathanAyers.
The photographer whose beautiful pictures captured the spirit of the Afghan people, and whowrote to his family: "Afghanistan is exactly [where]…I wanted to be" -- Corporal Jason Bogar.
  
The father who loved surfing with his son; the platoon leader who led a dash through thegunfire to that post to reinforce his men -- 1st Lieutenant Jonathan Brostrom. 
An immigrant from Mexico who became a proud American soldier, on his third tour, whosefinal thoughts were of his family and his beloved wife, Lesly -- Sergeant Israel Garcia.
A young man of deep faith, who served God and country, who could always get a laugh withhis impersonation of his commander -- Corporal Jason Hovater.
The husband who couldn’t wait to become an uncle; the adventurous spirit who in every photofrom Afghanistan has a big smile on his face -- Corporal Matthew Phillips.
The big guy with an even bigger heart, a prankster whose best play was cleaning up at thepoker table with his buddies and his dad -- Corporal Pruitt Rainey.
And the youngest, just 20 years old, the "little brother" of the platoon, who loved to playguitar, and who, says his dad, did everything in his life with passion -- Corporal GunnarZwilling.
These American patriots lived to serve us all.  They died to protect each of us.  And theirlegacy lives on in the hearts of all who love them still, especially their families.  Mothers.Fathers.  Wives.  Brothers and sisters.  Sons and daughters. 
To you, their families, I know no words can match the depth of your loss, but please knowthat this nation will honor your soldiers now and forever.  And I would ask the Gold Starfamilies from that deployment to please stand -- including Ali Kahler, age 11, and JaseBrostrom, who this week turns 12.  Please stand.
This is the story Ryan wants us to remember -- soldiers who loved each other like brothersand who fought for each other, and families who have made a sacrifice that our nation mustnever forget.  Ryan says, "I think we owe it to them to live lives worthy of their sacrifice." And he’s absolutely right.
As Commander-in-Chief, I believe one of the ways we can do that is by heeding the lessons ofWanat.  When this nation sends our troops into harm’s way, they deserve a sound strategyand a well-defined mission.  And they deserve the forces and support to get the job done. And that's what we owe soldiers like Ryan and all the comrades that were lost.  That’s how wecan truly honor all those who gave their lives that day.  That’s how, as a nation, we canremain worthy of their sacrifice.
I know that's a view that's shared by our Secretary of Defense and by our Joint Chiefs of Staffand all the leadership here.  They’re hard lessons, but they’re ones that are deeply engrainedin our hearts. 
  
It is remarkable that we have young men and women serving in our military who, day in, dayout, are able to perform with so much integrity, so much humility, and so much courage. Ryan represents the very best of that tradition, and we are very, very proud of him, as we areof all of you.  
So God bless you, Ryan.  God bless all who serve in our name.
May God continue to bless the United States of America.
