Good afternoon, everybody.  Please have a seat.  I hear you have some questions for me. But let me just make a few remarks at the top, and then I'll open it up.
First of all, I want to reiterate what I said on Friday.  Right now, our economy is stillrecovering from a very deep and damaging crisis, so our top priority has to be jobs andgrowth.  We’ve got to build on the progress that we’ve made, because this nation succeedswhen we’ve got a growing, thriving middle class. 
And that’s the idea at the core of the plan that I talked about on the campaign trail over thelast year:  Rewarding manufacturers and small businesses that create jobs here, notoverseas; providing more Americans the chance to earn the skills that businesses are lookingfor right now; keeping this country at the forefront of research, technology, and clean energy;putting people back to work rebuilding our roads, our bridges, and our schools; and reducingour deficit in a balanced and responsible way.
Now, on this last item, we face a very clear deadline that requires us to make some bigdecisions on jobs, taxes and deficits by the end of the year.  Both parties voted to set thisdeadline.  And I believe that both parties can work together to make these decisions in abalanced and responsible way.  
  
Yesterday, I had a chance to meet with labor and civic leaders for their input.  Today, I’mmeeting with CEOs of some of America’s largest companies.  And I’ll meet with leaders of bothparties of Congress before the week is out.  Because there’s only one way to solve thesechallenges, and that is to do it together.
As I’ve said before, I’m open to compromise and I’m open to new ideas.  And I’ve beenencouraged over the past week to hear Republican after Republican agree on the need formore revenue from the wealthiest Americans as part of our arithmetic if we’re going to beserious about reducing the deficit.   
Because when it comes to taxes, there are two pathways available:  Option one, if Congressfails to act by the end of the year, everybody’s taxes will automatically go up -- including the98 percent of Americans who make less than $250,000 a year and the 97 percent of smallbusinesses who earn less than $250,000 a year.  That doesn’t make sense.  Our economycan’t afford that right now.  Certainly no middle-class family can afford that right now.  Andnobody in either party says that they want it to happen.
The other option is to pass a law right now that would prevent any tax hike whatsoever on thefirst $250,000 of everybody’s income.  And by the way, that means every American, includingthe wealthiest Americans, get a tax cut.  It means that 98 percent of all Americans, and 97percent of all small businesses won’t see their taxes go up a single dime.  The Senate hasalready passed a law like this.  Democrats in the House are ready to pass a law like this.  AndI hope Republicans in the House come on board, too. 
We should not hold the middle class hostage while we debate tax cuts for the wealthy.  Weshould at least do what we agree on, and that's to keep middle-class taxes low.  And I’ll bringeveryone in to sign it right away so we can give folks some certainty before the holidayseason.
I won’t pretend that figuring out everything else will be easy, but I'm confident we can do it --and I know we have to.  I know that that's what the American people want us to do.  Thatwas the very clear message from the election last week.  And that was the message of a letterthat I received over the weekend. 
It came from a man in Tennessee who began by writing that he didn’t vote for me -- which isokay.  But what he said was even though he didn’t give me his vote, he’s giving me hissupport to move this country forward.  And he said the same to his Republicanrepresentatives in Washington.  He said that he’ll back each of us, regardless of party, as longas we work together to make life better for all of us.  And he made it clear that if we don’tmake enough progress, he’ll be back in touch. 
“My hope,” he wrote, “is that we can make progress in light of personal and party principles,special interest groups, and years of business as usual.  We’ve got to work together and putour differences aside.”
  
I couldn't say it better myself.  That’s precisely what I intend to do.
And with that, let me open it up for your questions.  And I'm going to start off with Ben Fellerof AP.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Can you assure the American people that there havebeen no breaches of national security or classified information in the scandal involvingGenerals Petraeus and Allen?  And do you think that you as Commander-in-Chief and theAmerican people should have been told that the CIA chief was under investigation before theelection?
President Obama:  Well, I have no evidence at this point from what I've seen that classifiedinformation was disclosed that in any way would have had a negative impact on our nationalsecurity. 
Obviously there’s an ongoing investigation.  I don't want to comment on the specifics of theinvestigation.  The FBI has its own protocols in terms of how they proceed, and I'm going tolet Director Mueller and others examine those protocols and make some statements to thepublic generally.
I do want to emphasize what I’ve said before:  General Petraeus had an extraordinary career. He served this country with great distinction in Iraq, in Afghanistan, and as head of the CIA. By his own assessment, he did not meet the standards that he felt were necessary as theDirector of CIA with respect to this personal matter that he is now dealing with, with his familyand with his wife.  And it’s on that basis that he tendered his resignation, and it’s on thatbasis that I accepted it.
But I want to emphasize that from my perspective at least, he has provided this country anextraordinary service.  We are safer because of the work that Dave Petraeus has done.  Andmy main hope right now is, is that he and his family are able to move on and that this endsup being a single side note on what has otherwise been an extraordinary career.
Question:  What about voters?  Did they deserve to know?
President Obama:  Again, I think you’re going to have to talk to the FBI in terms of whattheir general protocols are when it comes to what started off as a potential criminalinvestigation. One of the challenges here is, is that we’re not supposed to meddle in criminalinvestigations, and that’s been our practice. And I think that there are certain procedures thatboth the FBI follow, or DOJ follow, when they’re involved in these investigations.
  
That’s traditionally been how we view things, in part because people are innocent until provenguilty, and we want to make sure that we don’t pre-judge these kinds of situations.  And somy expectation is, is that they followed protocols that they already established.
Jessica Yellin.  Where’s Jessica?
Question:  Mr. President, on the fiscal cliff, two years ago, sir, you said that you wouldn’textend the Bush-era tax cuts, but at the end of the day, you did.  So, respectfully, sir, whyshould the American people and the Republicans believe that you won’t cave again this time?
President Obama:  Well, two years ago, the economy was in a different situation.  We werestill very much in the early parts of recovering from the worst economic crisis since the GreatDepression.  And ultimately, we came together not only to extend the Bush tax cuts, but alsoa wide range of policies that were going to be good for the economy at that point --unemployment insurance extensions, payroll tax extension -- all of which made a difference,and is part of the reason why what we've seen now is 32 consecutive months of job growthand over 5.5 million jobs created and the unemployment rate coming down.
But what I said at the time is what I meant, which is this was a one-time proposition.  Andwhat I have told leaders privately as well as publicly is that we cannot afford to extend theBush tax cuts for the wealthy.  What we can do is make sure that middle-class taxes don’t goup. 
And so the most important step we can take right now -- I think the foundation for a deal thathelps the economy, creates jobs, gives consumers certainty, which means gives businessesconfidence that they're going to have consumers during the holiday season -- is if we rightaway say 98 percent of Americans are not going to see their taxes go up; 97 percent of smallbusinesses are not going to see their taxes go up. 
If we get that in place, we are actually removing half of the fiscal cliff.  Half of the danger toour economy is removed by that single step. 
And what we can then do is shape a process whereby we look at tax reform -- which I'm veryeager to do.  I think we can simplify our tax system.  I think we can make it more efficient.We can eliminate loopholes and deductions that have a distorting effect on our economy.  Ibelieve that we have to continue to take a serious look at how we reform our entitlements,because health care costs continue to be the biggest driver of our deficits.
So there is a package to be shaped, and I'm confident that parties -- folks of goodwill in bothparties can make that happen.  But what I'm not going to do is to extend Bush tax cuts forthe wealthiest 2 percent that we can't afford, and according to economists, will have the leastpositive impact on our economy.
  
Question:  You've said that the wealthiest must pay more.  Would closing loopholes insteadof raising rates for them satisfy you?
President Obama:  I think that there are loopholes that can be closed, and we should look athow we can make the process of deductions, the filing process easier, simpler.  But when itcomes to the top 2 percent, what I’m not going to do is to extend further a tax cut for folkswho don’t need it, which would cost close to a trillion dollars. 
And it’s very difficult to see how you make up that trillion dollars -- if we’re serious aboutdeficit reduction -- just by closing loopholes and deductions.  The math tends not to work. And I think it’s important to establish a basic principle that was debated extensively during thecourse of this campaign.  I mean, this shouldn’t be a surprise to anybody.  If there was onething that everybody understood was a big difference between myself and Mr. Romney, it waswhen it comes to how we reduce our deficit, I argued for a balanced, responsible approach,and part of that included making sure that the wealthiest Americans pay a little bit more. 
I think every voter out there understood that that was an important debate, and the majorityof voters agreed with me.  By the way, more voters agreed with me on this issue than votedfor me.  So we’ve got a clear majority of the American people who recognize if we’re going tobe serious about deficit reduction, we’ve got to do it in a balanced way. 
The only question now is are we going to hold the middle class hostage in order to go aheadand let that happen?  Or can we all step back and say, here’s something we agree on -- wedon’t want middle-class taxes to go up.  Let’s go ahead and lock that in.  That will be good forthe economy.  It will be good for consumers.  It will be good for businesses.  It takes the edgeoff the fiscal cliff.  And let’s also then commit ourselves to the broader package of deficitreduction that includes entitlement changes and it includes potentially tax reform, as well asI’m willing to look at additional work that we can do on the discretionary spending side.
So I want a big deal.  I want a comprehensive deal.  I want to see if we can, at least for theforeseeable future, provide certainty to businesses and the American people so that we canfocus on job growth, so that we’re also investing in the things that we need.  But right nowwhat I want to make sure of is that taxes on middle-class families don’t go up.  And there’s avery easy way to do that.  We could get that done by next week.
Lori Montenegro, Telemundo.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  On immigration reform, the criticism in the past hasbeen that you did not put forth legislation with specific ideas and send it up to the Hill.  Thistime around you have said again that this will be one of the top priorities for a second term. Will you then send legislation to the Hill?  And exactly what do you envision is broadimmigration reform?  Does that include a legalization program?  And also, what lessons, ifany, did Democrats learn from this last election and the Latino vote?
  
President Obama:  Well, I think what was incredibly encouraging was to see a significantincrease in Latino turnout. It is the fastest-growing group in the country.  And historicallywhat you’ve seen is the Latino vote, vote at lower rates than the broader population, andthat's beginning to change.  You're starting to see a sense of empowerment and civicparticipation that I think is going to be powerful and good for the country.
And it is why I’m very confident that we can get immigration reform done.  Before the electionI had given a couple interviews where I predicted that the Latino vote was going to be strong,and that that would cause some reflection on the part of Republicans about their position onimmigration reform.  I think we’re starting to see that already.  I think that's a positive sign.
This has not historically been a partisan issue -- we’ve had President Bush and John McCainand others who have supported comprehensive immigration reform in the past.  So we needto seize the moment.  And my expectation is, is that we get a bill introduced and we begin theprocess in Congress very soon after my inauguration.  And in fact, some conversations I thinkare already beginning to take place among senators and congressmen and my staff aboutwhat would this look like.
And when I say comprehensive immigration reform, it is very similar to the outlines ofprevious efforts at comprehensive immigration reform.  I think it should include a continuationof the strong border security measures that we’ve taken because we have to secure ourborders.  I think it should contain serious penalties for companies that are purposely hiringundocumented workers and taking advantage of them.  And I do think that there should be apathway for legal status for those who are living in this country, are not engaged in criminalactivity, are here simply to work.  It’s important for them to pay back-taxes.  It’s importantfor them to learn English.  It’s important for them to potentially pay a fine.  But to give themthe avenue whereby they can resolve their legal status here in this country I think is veryimportant.
Obviously, making sure that we put into law what the first step that we’ve takenadministratively dealing with the DREAM Act kids is very important as well.  One thing thatI’m very clear about is that young people who are brought here through no fault of their own,who have gone to school here, pledged allegiance to our flag, want to serve in our military,want to go to school and contribute to our society, that they shouldn’t be under the cloud ofdeportation, that we should give them every opportunity to earn their citizenship.
And so there are other components to it, obviously.  The business community continues to beconcerned about getting enough high-skill workers, and I am a believer that if you’ve got aPhD in physics or computer science who wants to stay here and start a business here, weshouldn’t make it harder for him to stay here; we should try to encourage him to contribute tothis society. 
I think that the agricultural sector obviously has very specific concerns about making sure thatthey’ve got a workforce that helps deliver food to our tables. 
  
So there are going to be a bunch of components to it, but I think whatever process we haveneeds to make sure our border security is strong, needs to deal with employers effectively,needs to provide a pathway for the undocumented here, needs to deal with the DREAM Actkids.  And I think that’s something that we can get done.
Chuck Todd.  Where’s Chuck?
Question:  Mr. President, I just want to follow on both Ben’s question and Jessica’s question. On having to do with Ben’s question --
President Obama:  How about Lori’s question?  Do you want to follow up on that one, too?
Question:  No, I feel like you answered that one completely. 
Are you withholding judgment on whether you should have known sooner that there was apotential -- that there was an investigation into whether your CIA Director -- potentially therewas a national security breach with your CIA Director -- do you believe you should haveknown sooner?  Are you withholding judgment until the investigation is complete on thatfront? 
And then the follow-up to Jessica’s question -- tax rates.  Are you -- is there no deal at theend of the year if tax rates for the top 2 percent aren’t the Clinton tax rates, period?  No ifs,ands, or buts -- any room in negotiating on that specific aspect of the fiscal cliff?
President Obama:  I am withholding judgment with respect to how the entire processsurrounding General Petraeus came up.  We don’t have all the information yet, but I want tosay that I have a lot of confidence generally in the FBI, and they’ve got a difficult job.  And soI’m going to wait and see to see if there’s any other --
Question:  -- that you should have known?  Do you think in hindsight --
President Obama:  Well, I mean, Chuck, what I’ll say is, is that if -- it is also possible thathad we been told, then you’d be sitting here asking a question about why were you interferingin a criminal investigation.  So I think it’s best right now for us to just see how this wholeprocess unfolded.
With respect to the tax rates, I just want to emphasize I am open to new ideas.  If Republicancounterparts or some Democrats have a great idea for us to raise revenue, maintainprogressivity, make sure the middle class isn’t getting hit, reduces our deficit, encouragesgrowth, I’m not going to just slam the door in their face.  I want to hear ideas fromeverybody.
Question:  -- red line.
  
President Obama:  Look, I believe this is solvable.  I think that fair-minded people can cometo an agreement that does not cause the economy to go back into recession, that protectsmiddle-class families, that focuses on jobs and growth, and reduces our deficit.  I’m confidentit can be done.
My budget, frankly, does it.  I understand that -- I don’t expect the Republicans simply toadopt my budget.  That’s not realistic.  So I recognize that we're going to have tocompromise.  And as I said on Election Night, compromise is hard, and not everybody gets100 percent of what they want and not everybody is going to be perfectly happy.
But what I will not do is to have a process that is vague, that says we're going to sort of, kindof, raise revenue through dynamic scoring or closing loopholes that have not been identified. And the reason I won't do that is because I don’t want to find ourselves in a position sixmonths from now or a year from now where, lo and behold, the only way to close the deficit isto sock it to middle-class families, or to burden families that have disabled kids or have aparent in a nursing home, or suddenly we've got to cut more out of our basic research budgetthat is the key to growing the economy in the long term.
So that’s my concern.  I'm less concerned about red lines, per se.  What I'm concerned aboutis not finding ourselves in a situation where the wealthy aren't paying more or aren't payingas much as they should, middle-class families one way or another are making up thedifference -- that’s the kind of status quo that has been going on here too long, and that’sexactly what I argued against during this campaign.  And if there’s one thing that I'm prettyconfident about is the American people understood what they were getting when they gaveme this incredible privilege of being in office for another four years. 
They want compromise.  They want action.  But they also want to make sure that middle-classfolks aren't bearing the entire burden and sacrifice when it comes to some of these bigchallenges.  They expect that folks at the top are doing their fair share as well.  And that’sgoing to be my guiding principle during these negotiations, but, more importantly, during thenext four years of my administration.
Nancy Cordes.
Question:  Mr. President, on Election Night, you said that you were looking forward tospeaking with Governor Romney, sitting down in the coming weeks to discuss ways that youcould work together on this nation's problems.  Have you extended that invitation?  Has heaccepted?  And in what ways do you think you can work together?
President Obama:  We haven't scheduled something yet.  I think everybody forgets that theelection was only a week ago and -- I know I've forgotten.  I forgot on Wednesday.  So I thinkeverybody needs to catch their breath.  I'm sure that Governor Romney is spending sometime with his family.
  
And my hope is, before the end of the year, though, that we have a chance to sit down andtalk.  There are certain aspects of Governor Romney’s record and his ideas that I think couldbe very helpful. 
Question:  Such as?
President Obama:  Well, to give you one example, I do think he did a terrific job running theOlympics.  And that skill set of trying to figure out how do we make something work betterapplies to the federal government.  There are a lot of ideas that I don’t think are partisanideas but are just smart ideas about how can we make the federal government more customerfriendly; how can we make sure that we’re consolidating programs that are duplicative; howcan we eliminate additional waste.  He presented some ideas during the course of thecampaign that I actually agree with.  So it would be interesting to talk to him about somethinglike that. There may be ideas that he has with respect to jobs and growth that can helpmiddle-class families that I want to hear.
So I’m not either prejudging what he’s interested in doing, nor am I suggesting I’ve got somespecific assignment.  But what I want to do is to get ideas from him and see if there are someways that we can potentially work together.
Question:   But when it comes to your relationships with Congress, one of the most frequentcriticisms we’ve heard over the past few years from members on both sides is that youhaven’t done enough to reach out and build relationships.  Are there concrete ways that youplan to approach your relationships with Congress in a second term?
President Obama:  Look, I think there’s no doubt that I can always do better, and so I willexamine ways that I can make sure to communicate my desire to work with everybody, solong as it’s advancing the cause of strengthening our middle class and improving oureconomy.  I’ve got a lot of good relationships with folks both in the House and the Senate.  Ihave a lot of relationships on both sides of the aisle.  It hasn’t always manifested itself in thekind of agreements that I’d like to see between Democrats and Republicans.  And so I think allof us have responsibilities to see if there are things that we can improve on.  And I don’texempt myself from needing to do some self-reflection and see if I can improve our workingrelationship. 
There are probably going to be still some very sharp differences.  And as I said during thecampaign, there are going to be times where there are fights, and I think those are fights thatneed to be had.  But what I think the American people don’t want to see is a focus on the nextelection instead of a focus on them. 
And I don’t have another election.  And Michelle and I were talking last night about what anincredible honor and privilege it is to be put in this position.  And there are people all acrossthis country, millions of folks, who worked so hard to help us get elected, but there are alsomillions of people who may not have voted for us but are also counting on us.
  
And we take that responsibility very seriously.  I take that responsibility very seriously.  And Ihope and intend to be an even better President in the second term than I was in the first.
Jonathan Karl.
Question:   Thank you, Mr. President.  Senator John McCain and Senator Lindsey Grahamboth said today that they want to have Watergate-style hearings on the attack on the U.S.consulate in Benghazi, and said that if you nominate Susan Rice to be Secretary of State, theywill do everything in their power to block her nomination.  As Senator Graham said, he simplydoesn’t trust Ambassador Rice after what she said about Benghazi.  I’d like your reaction tothat.  And would those threats deter you from making a nomination like that?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, I’m not going to comment at this point on variousnominations that I’ll put forward to fill out my Cabinet for the second term.  Those are thingsthat are still being discussed.
But let me say specifically about Susan Rice, she has done exemplary work.  She hasrepresented the United States and our interests in the United Nations with skill andprofessionalism and toughness and grace. 
As I’ve said before, she made an appearance at the request of the White House in which shegave her best understanding of the intelligence that had been provided to her.  If SenatorMcCain and Senator Graham and others want to go after somebody, they should go after me. And I’m happy to have that discussion with them.  But for them to go after the U.N.Ambassador, who had nothing to do with Benghazi, and was simply making a presentationbased on intelligence that she had received, and to besmirch her reputation is outrageous. 
And we’re after an election now.  I think it is important for us to find out exactly whathappened in Benghazi, and I’m happy to cooperate in any ways that Congress wants.  Wehave provided every bit of information that we have, and we will continue to provideinformation.  And we’ve got a full-blown investigation, and all that information will bedisgorged to Congress. 
And I don't think there’s any debate in this country that when you have four Americans killed,that's a problem.  And we’ve got to get to the bottom of it, and there needs to beaccountability.  We’ve got to bring those who carried it out to justice.  They won’t get anydebate from me on that.
But when they go after the U.N. Ambassador, apparently because they think she’s an easytarget, then they’ve got a problem with me.  And should I choose, if I think that she would bethe best person to serve America in the capacity of the State Department, then I willnominate her.  That's not a determination that I’ve made yet.
Ed Henry.
  
Question:   I want to take Chuck’s lead and just ask a very small follow-up, which is whetheryou feel you have a mandate not just on taxes but on a range of issues because of yourdecisive victory? 
But I want to stay on Benghazi, based on what Jon asked because you said, if they want tocome after me, come after me.  I wanted to ask about the families of these four Americanswho were killed.  Sean Smith’s father, Ray, said he believes his son basically called 911 forhelp and they didn't get it.  And I know you’ve said you grieve for these four Americans, thatit’s being investigated, but the families have been waiting for more than two months.  So Iwould like to -- for you to address the families, if you can.  On 9/11, as Commander-in-Chief,did you issue any orders to try to protect their lives?
President Obama:  Ed, I’ll address the families not through the press.  I’ll address thefamilies directly, as I already have.  And we will provide all the information that is availableabout what happened on that day.  That’s what the investigation is for. 
But as I’ve said repeatedly, if people don’t think that we did everything we can to make surethat we saved the lives of folks who I sent there and who were carrying out missions on behalfof the United States, then you don’t know how our Defense Department thinks or our StateDepartment thinks or our CIA thinks.  Their number-one priority is obviously to protectAmerican lives.  That’s what our job is.  Now --
Question:  [Inaudible.]
President Obama:  Ed, I will put forward every bit of information that we have.  I can tellyou that immediately upon finding out that our folks were in danger, that my orders to mynational security team were do whatever we need to do to make sure they’re safe.  And that’sthe same order that I would give any time that I see Americans are in danger, whetherthey’re civilian or military, because that’s our number-one priority.
With respect to the issue of mandate, I’ve got one mandate. I’ve got a mandate to helpmiddle-class families and families that are working hard to try to get into the middle class. That’s my mandate.  That’s what the American people said.  They said:  Work really hard tohelp us.  Don’t worry about the politics of it; don’t worry about the party interests; don’tworry about the special interests.  Just work really hard to see if you can help us get ahead --because we’re working really hard out here and we’re still struggling, a lot of us.  That’s mymandate.
I don’t presume that because I won an election that everybody suddenly agrees with me oneverything.  I’m more than familiar with all the literature about presidential overreach insecond terms.  We are very cautious about that.  On the other hand, I didn’t get reelected justto bask in reelection.  I got elected to do work on behalf of American families and smallbusinesses all across the country who are still recovering from a really bad recession, but arehopeful about the future. 
  
And I am, too.  The one thing that I said during the campaign that maybe sounds like a bunchof campaign rhetoric, but now that the campaign is over I am going to repeat it and hopefullyyou guys will really believe me -- when you travel around the country, you are inspired by thegrit and resilience and hard work and decency of the American people.  And it just makes youwant to work harder.  You meet families who are -- have overcome really tough odds andsomehow are making it and sending their kids to college.  And you meet young people whoare doing incredible work in disadvantaged communities because they believe in the Americanideal and it should available for everybody.  And you meet farmers who are helping each otherduring times of drought, and you meet businesses that kept their doors open during therecession, even though the owner didn’t have to take a salary. 
And when you talk to these folks, you say to yourself, man, they deserve a better governmentthan they've been getting.  They deserve all of us here in Washington to be thinking everysingle day, how can I make things a little better for them -- which isn't to say that everythingwe do is going to be perfect, or that there aren't just going to be some big, tough challengesthat we have to grapple with.  But I do know the federal government can make a difference. 
We're seeing it right now on the Jersey coast and in New York.  People are still going througha really tough time; the response hasn't been perfect; but it's been aggressive and strong andfast and robust, and a lot of people have been helped because of it.  And that’s a pretty goodmetaphor for how I want the federal government to operate generally, and I'm going to doeverything I can to make sure it does.
Christi Parson.  Hey. 
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President, and congratulations, by the way. 
President Obama:  Thanks. 
Question:  One quick follow up --
President Obama:  Christi was there when I was running for state Senate.
Question:  That’s right, I was. 
President Obama:  So Christi and I go back a ways.
Question:  I've never seen you lose.  I wasn't looking that one time.
President Obama:  There you go.   
  
Question:  One quick follow-up, and then I want to ask you about Iran.  I just want to makesure I understood what you said.  Can you envision any scenario in which we do go off thefiscal cliff at the end of the year? 
And on Iran, are you preparing a final diplomatic push here to resolve the nuclear programissue, and are we headed toward one-on-one talks?
President Obama:  Well, obviously, we can all imagine a scenario where we go off the fiscalcliff.  If despite the election, if despite the dangers of going over the fiscal cliff and what thatmeans for our economy, that there’s too much stubbornness in Congress that we can't evenagree on giving middle-class families a tax cut, then middle-class families are all going to endup having a big tax hike.  And that’s going to be a pretty rude shock for them, and I suspectwill have a big impact on the holiday shopping season, which, in turn, will have an impact onbusiness planning and hiring, and we can go back into a recession. 
It would be a bad thing.  It is not necessary.  So I want to repeat:  Step number one that wecan take in the next couple of weeks, provide certainty to middle-class families -- 98 percentof families who make less than $250,000 a year, 97 percent of small businesses -- that theirtaxes will not go up a single dime next year.  Give them that certainty right now.  We can getthat done. 
We can then set up a structure whereby we are dealing with tax reform, closing deductions,closing loopholes, simplifying, dealing with entitlements.  And I’m ready and willing to makebig commitments to make sure that we’re locking in the kind of deficit reductions that stabilizeour deficit, start bringing it down, start bringing down our debt.  I’m confident we can do it.
And, look, I’ve been living with this for a couple of years now.  I know the math pretty well. And it really is arithmetic; it’s not calculus.  There are some tough things that have to bedone, but there is a way of doing this that does not hurt middle-class families, that does nothurt our seniors, doesn’t hurt families with disabled kids, allows us to continue to invest inthose things that make us grow, like basic research and education, helping young peopleafford going to college.  As we’ve already heard from some Republican commentators, amodest tax increase on the wealthy is not going to break their backs; they’ll still be wealthy. And it will not impinge on business investment. 
So we know how to do this.  This is just a matter of whether or not we come together and goahead and say, Democrats and Republicans, we’re both going to hold hands and do what’sright for the American people.  And I hope that’s what happens.
With respect to Iran, I very much want to see a diplomatic resolution to the problem.  I wasvery clear before the campaign, I was clear during the campaign, and I’m now clear after thecampaign -- we’re not going to let Iran get a nuclear weapon.  But I think there is still awindow of time for us to resolve this diplomatically.  We’ve imposed the toughest sanctions inhistory.  It is having an impact on Iran’s economy. 
  
There should be a way in which they can enjoy peaceful nuclear power while still meeting theirinternational obligations and providing clear assurances to the international community thatthey’re not pursuing a nuclear weapon. 
And so, yes, I will try to make a push in the coming months to see if we can open up adialogue between Iran and not just us, but the international community, to see if we can getthis things resolved.  I can’t promise that Iran will walk through the door that they need towalk through, but that would be very much the preferable option.
Question:  And under what circumstances would one-on-one conversations take place?
President Obama:  I won’t talk about the details in negotiations.  But I think it’s fair to saywe want to get this resolved, and we’re not going to be constrained by diplomatic niceties orprotocols.  If Iran is serious about wanting to resolve this, they’ll be in a position to resolve it.
Question:  At one point just prior to the election that was talk that talks might be imminent.  
President Obama:  That was not true, and it’s not true as of today.
Just going to knock through a couple others.  Mark Landler.  Where’s Mark?  There he is rightin front of me.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  In his endorsement of you a few weeks ago, MayorBloomberg said he was motivated by the belief that you would do more to confront the threatof climate change than your opponent.  Tomorrow you’re going up to New York City whereyou’re going to, I assume, see people who are still suffering the effects of Hurricane Sandy,which many people say is further evidence of how a warming globe is changing our weather. What specifically do you plan to do in a second term to tackle the issue of climate change? And do you think the political will exists in Washington to pass legislation that could includesome kind of attacks on carbon? 
President Obama:  As you know, Mark, we can’t attribute any particular weather event toclimate change.  What we do know is the temperature around the globe is increasing fasterthan was predicted even 10 years ago.  We do know that the Arctic ice cap is melting fasterthan was predicted even five years ago.  We do know that there have been extraordinarily --there have been an extraordinarily large number of severe weather events here in NorthAmerica, but also around the globe.
And I am a firm believer that climate change is real, that it is impacted by human behaviorand carbon emissions.  And as a consequence, I think we've got an obligation to futuregenerations to do something about it.
  
Now, in my first term, we doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars and trucks.  That will havean impact.  That will take a lot of carbon out of the atmosphere.  We doubled the productionof clean energy, which promises to reduce the utilization of fossil fuels for power generation. And we continue to invest in potential breakthrough technologies that could further removecarbon from our atmosphere.  But we haven't done as much as we need to.
So what I'm going to be doing over the next several weeks, next several months, is having aconversation, a wide-ranging conversation with scientists, engineers, and elected officials tofind out what can -- what more can we do to make a short-term progress in reducing carbons,and then working through an education process that I think is necessary -- a discussion, aconversation across the country about what realistically can we do long term to make surethat this is not something we're passing on to future generations that's going to be veryexpensive and very painful to deal with.
I don't know what either Democrats or Republicans are prepared to do at this point, becausethis is one of those issues that's not just a partisan issue; I also think there are regionaldifferences.  There’s no doubt that for us to take on climate change in a serious way wouldinvolve making some tough political choices.  And understandably, I think the Americanpeople right now have been so focused, and will continue to be focused on our economy andjobs and growth, that if the message is somehow we're going to ignore jobs and growthsimply to address climate change, I don't think anybody is going to go for that.  I won't go forthat.
If, on the other hand, we can shape an agenda that says we can create jobs, advance growth,and make a serious dent in climate change and be an international leader, I think that'ssomething that the American people would support.
So you can expect that you’ll hear more from me in the coming months and years about howwe can shape an agenda that garners bipartisan support and helps move this agenda forward.
Question:  Sounds like you're saying, though, in the current environment, we're probably stillshort of a consensus on some kind of attack.
President Obama:  That I'm pretty certain of.  And, look, we're still trying to debate whetherwe can just make sure that middle-class families don't get a tax hike.  Let’s see if we canresolve that.  That should be easy.  This one is hard -- but it’s important because one of thethings that we don't always factor in are the costs involved in these natural disasters; we justput them off as something that's unconnected to our behavior right now.  And I think what --based on the evidence we're seeing, is that what we do now is going to have an impact and acost down the road if we don’t do something about it.
All right, last question.  Mark Felsenthal.  Where’s Mark?
  
Question:  Thank you.  Mr. President, the Assad regime is engaged in a brutal crackdown onits people.  France has recognized the opposition coalition.  What would it take for the UnitedStates to do the same?  And is there any point at which the United States would considerarming the rebels?
President Obama:  I was one of the first leaders I think around the world to say Assad hadto go, in response to the incredible brutality that his government displayed in the face of whatwere initially peaceful protests.
Obviously, the situation in Syria has deteriorated since then.  We have been extensivelyengaged with the international community as well as regional powers to help the opposition. We have committed to hundreds of millions of dollars of humanitarian aid to help folks bothinside of Syria and outside of Syria.  We are constantly consulting with the opposition on howthey can get organized so that they’re not splintered and divided in the face of the onslaughtfrom the Assad regime. 
We are in very close contact with countries like Turkey and Jordan that immediately borderSyria and have an impact -- and obviously Israel, which is having already grave concerns, aswe do, about, for example, movements of chemical weapons that might occur in such achaotic atmosphere and that could have an impact not just within Syria, but on the region asa whole.
I’m encouraged to see that the Syrian opposition created an umbrella group that may havemore cohesion than they’ve had in the past.  We’re going to be talking to them.  My envoysare going to be traveling to various meetings that are going to be taking place with theinternational community and the opposition.
We consider them a legitimate representative of the aspirations of the Syrian people.  We’renot yet prepared to recognize them as some sort of government in exile, but we do think thatit is a broad-based representative group.  One of the questions that we’re going to continue topress is making sure that that opposition is committed to a democratic Syria, an inclusiveSyria, a moderate Syria.
We have seen extremist elements insinuate themselves into the opposition, and one of thethings that we have to be on guard about -- particularly when we start talking about armingopposition figures -- is that we’re not indirectly putting arms in the hands of folks who woulddo Americans harm, or do Israelis harm, or otherwise engage in actions that are detrimentalto our national security.
So we're constantly probing and working on that issue.  The more engaged we are, the morewe'll be in a position to make sure that we are encouraging the most moderate, thoughtfulelements of the opposition that are committed to inclusion, observance of human rights, andworking cooperatively with us over the long term.
  
Thank you very much.
Question:  -- spending side of the fiscal cliff.  On spending, the $1.2 trillion trigger, is thatsomething that you can see having a short-term component -- because I remember you saidit's not happening -- 
President Obama:  That was a great question, but it would be a horrible precedent for me toanswer your question just because you yelled it out.
So thank you very much, guys.
