Myanmar Luu Ngae Myar Min Galarbar!  It’s wonderful to be back in Myanmar. Everybody,please have a seat. Have a seat. Oh, we got some signs -- “Reform is fake.” “Change…” --okay, well, you guys will have a chance to ask questions later. Yeah, you can put them away.That’s why we’re here -- for a town hall. See, that’s the thing, when you have a town hall, youdon’t have a protest because you can just ask the questions directly.
Two years ago, I was the first American President to visit this country, and I was deeplymoved by the generous hospitality that greeted us here, and the sight of children waving theflags of both of our nations. And I was inspired by the incredible diversity and culture, and thevarious religious sites from different faiths and communities. And I was inspired again today,when I had the opportunity to visit the Secretariat -- the birthplace of modern Burma; theblueprint for democracy; a home to Burmese, Chinese, Indians, Buddhists, Muslims, Hindus,and Christians who lived together peacefully -- an incredible example of multicultural andmulti-faith diversity and tolerance. And it’s a profound symbol of this country’s rich diversityand this region’s potential.
  
Whenever I travel the world, from Europe to Africa, South America to Southeast Asia, one ofthe things I most enjoy doing is meeting young men and women like you. It’s more fun thanbeing in a conference room. And it’s also more important -- because you are the youngleaders who will determine the future of this country and this region. So I’m going to keep myremarks short at the top, because I want to take as many questions and comments from you.
As President of the United States, I’ve made it a priority to deepen America’s ties withSoutheast Asia -- in particular, with the young people of Southeast Asia. And I do this forreasons that go beyond the fact that I spent some of my childhood in Southeast Asia, inIndonesia. And that gives me a special attachment, a special feeling for Southeast Asia andthis region. But I do it mainly because the 10 nations of ASEAN are home to about one in tenof the world’s citizens. About two-thirds of Southeast Asia’s population is under 35 years old.So this region -- a region of growing economies and emerging democracies, and a vibrantdiversity that includes oceans and islands, and jungles and cities, and peoples of differentraces and religions and beliefs -- this region will shape the 21st century.
And that’s why I launched the Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative -- to deepenAmerica’s engagement with the next generation of leaders in government and civil society, ineducation and in entrepreneurship. And more than 10,000 young leaders like you have joinedthis Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative network, working to solve the challenges andseize the opportunities of this dynamic region in a spirit of mutual cooperation and respect. Soearlier this year, I held a town hall just like this one, in Malaysia. And today, I’d like to takeour next steps together with you.
When I took office nearly six years ago, I said the United States would extend our hand to anynation willing to unclench its fist. And here, after decades of authoritarian rule, we’ve begun tosee significant progress in just a few years. There is more of a sense of hope in Myanmar, thatwas once so closed to the world, about the role that it can now play in the region and in theworld.
But we know that a journey to progress is not completed overnight. There are setbacks andfalse starts, and sometimes even reverses. And that was true in America during our 238-yearhistory. It’s happened here in the past two or three years. We’ve seen some progress, and weshould acknowledge that progress.
We also know, though, that despite the fact that political prisoners have been released andpeople are more engaged in political dialogue, there’s a parliament and civil society isemerging -- despite all that, some reforms have not come quickly enough. There are stillattacks against journalists and against ethnic minorities. America is still deeply concernedabout the humanitarian situation in Rakhine state, and the treatment of minorities who endurediscrimination and abuse.
  
On this visit, I’ve met separately with President Thein Sein and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, aswell as members of parliament, and civil society leaders. And we discussed key reforms thathave to be made to ensure that human rights and freedoms are respected, and the people ofthis country can reach for their rightful place in the region and the world. And I was alsoproud to announce that the Peace Corps will come here, to Myanmar, to deepen the tiesbetween our people. It gives an extraordinary opportunity for young Americans to interactwith young people here in Myanmar. And that people-to-people exchange is often asimportant or more important as government-to-government exchanges.
So progress is not inevitable. History does not always march forward. History can travelsideways and sometimes backwards. Building trust after years of conflict takes time. Beingable to look past the scars of violence takes courage. Securing the gains of freedom anddemocracy requires good faith and strength of will, and tolerance and respect for diversity,and it requires vigilance from all citizens. The American people know well that rights andfreedoms are not given; they have to be won through struggle and through discipline, andpersistence and faith. And it’s often young people who have led these struggles; who havecompelled us to slowly but surely perfect our own union in America over time.
Now, I understand there's a Burmese saying. I've got to make sure that I say this right. Ngotemi thè daing -- help me out. Is that right? -- tet naing hpyar yauk. 
So for those Americans who don't speak Burmese as well as I do -- that means, "Dive untilyou reach the sand, climb until you reach the top. Keep persevering."
And America is committed to helping the young people of this nation and this region climbuntil you reach the top. We believe in this nation. That's why I've come and visited twice inthe last few years, because we see a future where democratic institutions can be accountableand responsive; where political activists are free; where elections are fair; where journalistscan pursue the truth; where ethnic minorities can live without fear.
So we're betting on this country, but we're also betting on this region, because we see youngpeople of different nations and religions and ethnicities who are eager to come together andaddress all the challenges that are out there: environmental protection; human rights;improving education; combating poverty; advocating for a greater role for women in business,in government and in society; increasing resilience in the face of natural disasters; spurringeconomic progress so more young people can follow in your footsteps and get a goodeducation and have opportunity.
We see young leaders who embrace the diversity of this region not as a weakness, but as astrength, and who realize that even though we are all individually different and come fromdifferent traditions and different communities, we're stronger when we work together.
  
So the future of this region, your region, is not going to be determined by dictators or byarmies, it's going to be determined by entrepreneurs and inventors and dreamers and peoplewho are doing things in the community. And you're going to be the leaders who make thathappen. Your generation has greater potential to shape society than any generation that'scome before because you have the power to get knowledge from everywhere, and you havemore sophistication and experiences than your parents or your grandparents. And you havenow the chance to share knowledge and experiences with other young people all across thisregion and around the world. And that wasn't true 20 years ago or 50 years ago.
La Min Oo uses his power to tell the story of his fellow Burmese. He studied at GettysburgCollege in the United States. The transformation that he watched unfold through Facebookinspired him to return home and make an award-winning documentary about the plight ofBurmese farmers. And he says, "My country has been closed so long, there are a lot of storiesto be told." So you young people have the chance to say -- to tell those stories. You have thepower to improve institutions that are very important for democratic governance, like civilsociety, and an impartial judicial, and a free press, and private enterprise. And there's somuch to build here.
In countries like this, it's critical that you get involved in that way. I'll give you an example.Ryan Louis Madrid dreamt of being a journalist. But as he stood surrounded by the wreckageof a typhoon in his beloved Philippines, he made himself into an instrument for his fellowcitizens rebuilding. Today the organization he co-founded puts solar rooftops in developingand recovering communities. And he wants to use his skills to encourage other enterprisingyoung people in developing countries to say in their countries and help their own people, tothink globally and act locally. You have the power to remind us all that human dignity is notjust a universal aspiration, but a human right.
So Wai Wai Nu spent seven years of her youth behind bars as a political prisoner. And shecalled it her "university about life." Today she uses that hard-earned degree to advocate fortolerance and acceptance, saying, "We too sacrificed many things for the same cause, thatthat is democracy."
You have the chance to overcome hatred and make sure that freedom rather than repression,hope rather than fear is governing your country. You have the power to set your owncountries on a new and different path.
And in all of this, America wants to be your partner. We want to help any way that we can tohelp you shape your future. We want you to have the tools and the connections and theresources that you need to change the world.
So one way that we can do this, I'm announcing a significant expansion of the YoungSoutheast Asian Leaders Initiative Fellowship, an exchange program that will bring 500Southeast Asian leaders to the United States every year.
  
And these fellows will have the chance to strengthen their professional leadership skills,network with one another, share experiences and ideas, and then come back home betterprepared to lead your region and change the world.
So some of these fellows will benefit from five-week instruction at some of the bestuniversities in America on issues like entrepreneurship and environmental stewardship andcivil society and human rights. Others will have the chance to work in professional fellowshipsat state and local governments and NGOs across the United States. And, by the way, throughthis program that I hope some of you will be able to take advantage of, when you spend timein the United States our people learn from you. So it's not just you learning from us.
And when these fellows then return home with these new ideas and new experiences, ourembassies and USAID missions will reach out and offer the support and resources to helpmake your dreams a reality. So today I'm proud to announce that America will convene ayoung Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative Summit in this region every year, giving fellows thechance to share their successes with each other and strengthen their network to accomplisheven more.
So I hope some of you will take advantage of this. I expect many of you will take up themantle of reform from student activists like Aung San Suu Kyi and Min Ko Naing; take yourrightful place as leaders in a stable and prosperous and progressive Southeast Asia. And asyou do, I promise you will have no better friend and partner than the United States ofAmerica.
So thank you very much. Kyeizu tin ba de. I now want to take your questions. 
And I hope you don't mind, because it's a little warm in Myanmar, I'm going to take off myjacket. 
Okay, so there should be -- I've got a microphone, and there should be mics in the audience.And I'll take as many questions as I can before I have to go to Australia.
All right, who wants to go first? This young man right here.
Question: I'm [inaudible.] I'm a third-year student, majoring in English at Sittwe University,Rakhine state, or as you would say, Rakhine state.
President Obama: I'm still working on my pronunciation. 
Question: I've experienced some sectarian and racial balance firsthand in my region. So thequestion I would like to ask you to answer is: How can I be part of educating my generationto promote tolerance and respect cultural differences, and most of all, eradicate extremismamong different ethnic groups?
  
President Obama: That's a great question. Thank you so much. I had a chance to meet withsome civil society groups, and I had a press conference earlier today. Yesterday, I had achance to meet with parliamentarians, including the speaker -- the two speakers, as well asAung San Suu Kyi, and then spoke with the President. And to all of them, I said this: There isno example of a country that is successful if its people are divided based on religion orethnicity. If you look at the Middle East right now and the chaos that’s taking place in a placelike Syria, so much of that is based on religious differences. Even though they’re all Muslim,Shia and Sunni are fighting each other. If you look in Northern Ireland, then Catholics andProtestants fought for decades and only now have arrived at peace.
So in this globalized world where people of different faiths and cultures and races are going tomeet each other inevitably -- because nobody just lives in a village anymore; people areconstantly getting information from different places and new ideas and meeting people whoare different from them –- it is critical for any country to abide by the basic principle that allpeople are equal, all people are deserving of respect, all people are equal under the law, allpeople can participate in the life of their country, all people should be able to express theirviews without fear of being repressed. And those attitudes start with each of us individually.It’s important that government play a role in making sure that it applies laws fairly, notarbitrarily, not on the basis of preferring one group over another.
But what’s also true is that each of us have to cultivate an attitude of tolerance and mutualrespect. And for young people, we have to try to encourage each other to be tolerant andrespectful. So in the United States, obviously one of the biggest problems historically has beenthe issue of racial discrimination. And part of our efforts to overcome racial discriminationinvolve passing laws like the Civil Rights Law and the Voting Rights Law, and that requiredmarches and protests and Dr. King. But part of the effort was also people changing the heartsand minds, and realizing that just because somebody doesn’t look like me doesn’t mean thatthey’re not worthy of respect.
And when you’re growing up and you saw a friend of yours call somebody by a derogatoryname, a rude name because they were different, it’s your job to say to that person, actually,that’s not the right way to think. If you are Christian and you have a friend who says I hateMuslims, then it’s up to you to say to that friend, you know what, I don’t believe in that; Ithink that’s the wrong attitude, I think we have to be respectful of the Muslim population. Ifyou’re Buddhist and you say -- you hear somebody in your group say I want to treat a Hindudifferently, it’s your job to speak out. So the most important thing I think is for you to, inwhatever circle of influence you have, speak out on behalf of tolerance and diversity andrespect.If you are quiet, then the people who are intolerant, they’ll own the stage and they’ll set theterms of the debate. And one of the things that leadership requires is saying things even whenit’s uncomfortable, even when it’s unpopular -- especially when it’s unpopular. So I hope thatas you get more influence, you’ll continue to speak out on behalf of these values.
All right, who’s next?
  
Okay, I’m going to go –- now, the one thing I’m going to do is I’m going to go boy, girl, boy,girl to make sure that it’s fair, because one thing I didn’t say in my initial speech is societiesthat are most successful also treat their women and girls with respect. Otherwise, they won’tbe successful. 
The young lady in the yellow, right there, who had her hand up. Okay, hold on so we can geta microphone.
Question: I am [inaudible]. I am Kachin and Burmese. I would like to ask about the ASEANaffair. So my question is, there are different political system and different level of democraticfreedom in ASEAN. Do you think those differences will cost challenges to ASEAN integration?And do you believe it is the right time to push for ASEAN integration? Thank you.
President Obama: Of the 10 countries in ASEAN, I just had a chance to meet with all theirleaders at the U.S.-ASEAN Summit. And the good news is that ASEAN has become moreambitious over the last several years in trying to promote integration, to work together onissues like disaster relief or public health or maritime security or improved education. And Ithink it’s inevitable that integration is going to happen more and more.
And my hope is that by encouraging integration, that the countries who are doing better onissues like democracy and human rights have a positive influence in bringing up thosecountries that don’t have such a good record. And we’ve actually I think seen that happen.Listen, when I first came into office, Myanmar was still very much a dictatorship. And therewas some controversy about me participating in an ASEAN Summit because there was still nofreedom in Myanmar. And I think that President Thein Sein, because he was with leaders likeSBY of Indonesia -- see there, all right, the Indonesians started cheering -- who had traveledthe path of democracy, I think President Thein Sein began to see how more open societieswere becoming more successful, and I think had a positive influence on -- I think hisparticipation in ASEAN had a positive influence in providing an opening to begin the process oftransition here in Myanmar.
But it’s important I think that even as we engage with countries that are less open or lessdemocratic, that we also continue to apply constructive criticism where they fall backwards,where they fall short. And sometimes that’s hard to do. I think a lot of the leaders of ASEANdon’t like to criticize each other because they think that it’s not respectful. And no country isperfect, so they worry that if we criticize one country then somebody will criticize us.
But I think the goal should be for all of us to try to improve what we do on behalf of ourpeople every single day. I’m very proud of the United States. I believe that the United Statesis a force for good around the world. But I wouldn’t be a good President if I don’t listen tocriticism of our policies and stay open to what other countries say about us. Sometimes Ithink those criticisms are unfair. Sometimes I think people like to complain about the UnitedStates because we’re doing too much. Sometimes they complain because they’re doing toolittle. Every problem around the world, why isn’t the United States doing something about it.
  
Sometimes there are countries that don’t take responsibility for themselves and they want usto fix it. And then when we do try to fix it, they say why are you meddling in our affairs. Yes,it’s kind of frustrating sometimes.
But the fact that we are getting these criticisms means that we’re constantly thinking, okay, isthis how we should apply this policy? Are we doing the right thing when we provide aid to acountry, but the country is still ruled by a small elite and maybe it’s not getting down to thepeople? Are we doing the right thing when we engage in training a military to become moreprofessional, but maybe the military is still engaging in repressive activity? If we’re not opento those criticisms, then we won’t get better, we won’t improve.
And I think all of us should be interested in trying to get better, because none of us areperfect and no country is perfect. So I do think ASEAN has an opportunity to play a veryimportant role. But integration is inevitable just because of the nature of economies today.There’s too much travel, there’s too much Internet, there are too many smartphones. When Iwas driving through here, everybody had a smartphone. I saw a bunch of people -- they didn’thave any shirt, but they had a smartphone. So what that means is -- and most manufacturingtoday of various products, the parts are made in, like, five different countries, and then theybecome integrated in some fashion. And then they’re sold all around the world. So integrationis going to happen no matter what. The question is, do we integrate at a high level thatimproves freedom and improves opportunity, or are we integrating at a low level, wherethere’s less freedom and less opportunity. And I believe integrating at a high level, and I hopemost members of ASEAN do also.
All right, it’s a guy’s turn now. I don’t want to discriminate against the men. This gentlemanright here. Yes, with the mustache and the beard. There you go. There’s a microphone comingright here. You can just stay where you are. Careful. Hold on to her, so she doesn’t fall.
Question: Hello, Mr. President Obama. My name is [inaudible] and I am studying law. Myquestion is, now we are in the democratic transition, so our country is facing so manychallenges in every sector. So if you were the President of Myanmar -- which sector you willfocus on first? And how you will make our country develop? Thank you. 
President Obama: Well, let me just say, you’re always popular in somebody else’s country. When you’re in your own country, everybody is complaining. I think you’re right, Myanmarhas so many challenges. I think the most important challenge right now is completing thetransition to democracy. And so my first focus is I think the focus that many people havealready talked about.
Number one, there needs to be an election next year. It shouldn’t be delayed. Number two,there should be constitutional amendments that ensure a transition over time to a fully civiliangovernment. Number three, there needs to be laws put in place to protect freedom of thepress, freedom of expression, freedom to politically organize.
  
And I think that if that process is fixed and institutionalized and made permanent, and younow have the tools to deal with all the other challenges, and I think that inevitably what wouldhappen if you had a genuine democracy in Myanmar is the focus next would then be onproviding economic opportunity, because Myanmar is still a very poor country. And what weknow in the 21st century is, is that the most important tools for economic opportunity aremaking sure that young people are getting a good education. And my understanding is, is thatthe education system in Myanmar is still under-developed. I think all of you represent the bestof Myanmar’s students. But my understanding is there are many villages you go to wherethere’s really no schools, as a practical matter, and many of the schools still teach just how tomemorize certain things rather than how to think critically about problems.
And every country at this point, if it wants to succeed, needs to put in place free, compulsoryeducation for its young people -- because they just can’t succeed unless they have some basicskills. They have to be able to read. They have to be able to do mathematics. They have tohave some familiarity with computers. They have to be able to understand basic principles ofscience. If you don’t have those basic tools, then it’s very hard to find a decent job in today’seconomy.
Now, because Myanmar is still very agricultural, I think issues of land reform and trying toincrease productivity in the agricultural sector is also a very immediate and urgent problem.This is true not just in Myanmar; this is true in many relatively poor countries. In Africa, forexample, we initiated something called Feed the Future, and the whole goal is to improve theproductivity of farmers. And farmers in many poor countries, they still use the sametechniques that they used 200 years ago. They’re still using a buffalo or an ox, and waiting onthe rains. And sometimes the new techniques, they're not necessarily expensive; it's just amatter of applying them scientifically.
And if you double yields for a farm and double income for farmers in a country like Myanmar,suddenly you have increased wealth, which means that some people now can startbusinesses. Maybe now somebody can take some of the profits they made and invest in atractor, or they can start processing the rice that they produce so that they can gain morevalue. Or they may be able to buy a smartphone so they know what the prices are in themarket, and not get taken advantage of. So just small changes are really important.
Now, my understanding, and I'm not expert, is that some of that will also require somereforms in terms of land ownership and leasing so that people can keep the products of theirlabor, as opposed to just being essentially what we call sharecroppers in the United States,where you're working the land, but you're giving it over to somebody else and never gettingahead.
So those are just two examples of things that I think will happen naturally if you've got ademocratic system in place.
  
All right, it's a young lady's turn. So this young lady in the glasses right here. She's wavingvery hard, so she must have an excellent question.
Question: Good morning. My name is [inaudible].
President Obama: It's afternoon, though.  Maybe you've been waiting here since morning. But now it's the afternoon.
Question: But you can call me Amy [ph]. I want to ask one question. My question is, now weare working on IT, so America is already doubled up in IT. So can you provide anydevelopment center of IT and job opportunity for youth?
President Obama: Well, I was just talking to the civil society groups, and there was oneperson there who mentioned that Internet penetration in Myanmar is still only about 9percent, which means there's enormous room for growth. The issue for IT in a country likeMyanmar is, first of all, setting up the infrastructure -- whether it's wireless or other methods-- so that people can start communicating. And once the hardware is in place, then where thereal development happens is in the software. And that's where it's really a matter ofeducation, training, and developing a homegrown capacity.
And so what we'll do is we'll work with both civil society groups, as well as the government, tofind opportunities where we can promote the building of the infrastructure that's required. Butwhat's really required is also making sure that young people are trained.
And part of what's going to have to happen is, in the United States most of the ITdevelopment happened through the private sector. Government invested in research, and sothe idea of the Internet was developed with the help of government funding. But what becamethen the World Wide Web and then all the applications and social media and all that was reallydeveloped through the private sector. So part of what has to happen once democracy isinstalled in Myanmar is then also looking at how are you structuring laws to encourageinnovation and entrepreneurship.
So, for example, one of the debates that we're having in trade negotiations with Asiancountries in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the big trade initiative that we're moving forward, isthe need to protect intellectual property. If you invent a better tractor, then in the UnitedStates, you go to a patent office and you register your patent. You show that this is a newinvention. And if anybody then wants to produce this new tractor, they have to pay you forusing your idea. The same is true for intellectual property. If you come up with the idea ofFacebook, then you need to be able to get a benefit from this idea.
And one of the problems I think that you still have in many countries in Southeast Asia andaround the world is weak intellectual property protections, which means that if you're anentrepreneur with a good idea, you don't want to start your business here, because next thingyou know somebody steals your idea and they just start their business.
  
So you'd rather start the idea in the United States where you know that it will be protected.And then maybe you will lease to other countries, but the jobs and the opportunities will havebeen created someplace else.
So setting up regulatory structures, protections for intellectual property, all those things arealso going to be very important in order to get a strong IT culture and an innovation culturehere in Myanmar and throughout the region.
Okay, it's a man's turn. Let's see. I'm going to go with this guy right here. Hold on a second.Now, you're not going to read that whole thing, are you?  Because --
Question: I read you a question --
President Obama: I think you have to summarize it quickly because we don't want --
Question: Yes, yes, just want to give you a kind of sheet, cheat sheet.
President Obama: Yes, I'll take the sheet. 
Question: Okay.
President Obama: There you go. All right.
Question: I have only one question.
President Obama: There are like -- there are 20 questions on here. 
Question: Just want you to know --
President Obama: Why don't you just ask me one of them? I'll read the rest.
Question: My question, as you know -- may I know your opinion about like how to createnational identity, or like Myanmar identity -- different, strong identity in our country?
President Obama: Yes. That's a great question. Yes, I was talking about this with the civilsociety groups because we are very supportive of the efforts to get a ceasefire and a peaceprocess with the ethnic groups that have been engaged in armed conflict for a long time. Andwe've already talked about some of the problems that the Muslim populations have faced inRakhine state.
  
But what I said to the civil society groups is, yes, it is important to protect specific ethnicgroups from discrimination. And it is natural in a democracy that ethnic groups organizeamong themselves to be heard in the halls of power. So in the United States, for example, asits democracy developed, the Irish in big cities, they came together and they builtorganizations, and they were able to promote the interests of Irish Americans. And AfricanAmericans, when they were seeking their freedom, you had organizations like the NAACP thatpromoted the interests of African Americans. So there's nothing wrong with groups organizingaround ethnic identity, or around economic interests, or around regional concerns. That's howa democracy naturally works. You get with people who agree with you or who are like you tomake sure that your concerns are heard.
But what I said is that it is important for a democracy that people's identities are also anational identity. If you walk down the streets of New York City, you will see people lookingmore different than this group right here. You'll see blue-eyed, blonde people. You'll see dark-
skinned, black people. You'll see Asians. You'll see Muslims. You'll see -- but if you ask any ofthose people, “What are you?” -- I'm American.
Now I may be an African American or an Asian American or an Irish American, but the firstthing I'll say is, I'm an American.
And if you don't have that sense of national unity, then it's very hard for a country to succeed-- particularly a small country like Myanmar.If people think in terms of ethnic identity before national identity, then I think over time thecountry will start breaking apart and democracy will not work. So there has to be a sense ofcommon purpose.
But that's not an excuse then for majority groups to say, don’t complain, to ethnic minorities -
- because the ethnic minorities may have some real complaints. And part of what is importantfor the majority groups to do -- if, in fact, you have a national identity, that means thatyou've got to be concerned with a minority also because it reflects badly on your country ifsomebody from a minority group is not being treated fairly.
America could not live up to its potential until it treated its black citizens fairly. That's just afact, that that was a stain on America when an entire group of people couldn't vote, or didn'thave legal protections. Because it made all the Declarations of Independence and Constitutionand rule of law, it made that seem like an illusion.
And so when the Civil Rights Movement happened in the United States, that wasn't just avictory for African Americans, that was a victory for America because what it showed was thatthe whole country was going to be concerned about everybody, not just about some people.And it was a victory for America's national identity that it was treating minorities fairly.
  
And that's I think how every country in ASEAN, including Myanmar, needs to think aboutthese problems. You need to respect people's differences. You need to be attentive to thegrievances of minorities that may be discriminated against. But both the majority and theminority, the powerful and the powerless, also have to have a sense of national identity inorder to be successful.
I got time for two more questions. Two more. He said one, but I'm going to take two. See, it'sgoing to be one of you three. What do you think? Who should -- out of the three of you, whoshould I call on? Are you friends? Okay, so why don't you decide?  What do you think? Okay,yes, rock, paper, scissors. Let's see.  Who won? Okay, go on. There you go. What did you winwith? Were you scissors or rock? Were you rock or scissors or paper?
Question: Rock.
President Obama: Rock.
Question: I rock!
President Obama: You rock?
Question: Yes.
President Obama: Yes.
Question: Mingalaba, Mr. President. I am from Burma from [inaudible] in American Center.Right now we're working on a documentary on Yangon University, Congregation Hall whereyou spoke the last time you came.
President Obama: Yes, last time I was here.
Question: Yes. So as you know, Yangon University has reopened last year, 2013. So do thinkit is a good start to rebuild the higher education system in Burma?
President Obama: Well, I think it's a great start. But I think -- as I said before, one of thebiggest challenges Myanmar is going to face is rebuilding its education system. And I think ithas to start early. It has to start from the youngest ages.
One of the things that we've learned from science is that the most that you will ever learn inyour entire life happens from the time you're born until you're three years old. Between yourbirth and the age of three, that's when your brain is developing the most. And what we'velearned, for example, is that when you read -- when parents read to young children evenbefore the children know how to read, the children are building a vocabulary that will put
  
them in a strong position then to learn how to read later on because they've heard the wordsover and over again.
And so I just make that point because it shows that if you're only worried about universityeducation, but you're not worrying about what happens to children when they're three, four,five, six years old, then you're missing the foundation for a good education system.
And this is true in the United States, as well. We've got the best university system in theworld. Obviously I'm biased because I'm the President of the United States, so I thinkeverything in the United States is the best in the world.
But I think anybody objectively would say that we have a system of universities and collegesthat is unequaled anyplace else. But we still have problems. And one of the things that I'mspending a lot of time on reform is the elementary, secondary school levels. And also, evenearlier having what we call early childhood education to get children off to a good start so thatby the time they go to school, they already know their alphabet and they can already startreading at an early age. And I hope that that ends up being a basic emphasis here inMyanmar.
But I also think that from what I've heard, one of the reforms that will need to take place inuniversities here is to make sure that in all the departments there is the ability for universitiesand students to shape curriculums and to have access to information from everywhere aroundthe world, and that it's not just a narrow process of indoctrination. Because the bestuniversities are ones that teach you how to think not what to think, right? A good education isnot just knowing facts, although you need to know facts. You need to know that two plus twois four; it's not five. That's an important fact. But you also need to know how to ask questions,and how to critically analyze a problem, and how to be able to distinguish between fact andopinion, and how to compare two different ideas.
And I think there's a danger sometimes in countries that are -- don't have a long tradition ofhigher education to try to narrow the learning process, as opposed to open it up. And I thinkthat that's something that I'm sure university students here in Myanmar will want to expressduring the course of this transition period and the reforms that are taking place.
All right, I've got time for one more question. Wait, wait, wait. No point in yelling. First of all,all the women have to put their hands down because I told you it was going to be boy, girl,boy, girl. And the second thing is, how many students are there from countries other thanMyanmar who are here? Okay, so I think that in the interest of ASEAN unity, and because thisis a Young Southeast Asian Leaders Forum, I've got to ask --
Question: [Inaudible.]
President Obama: No, no, no, first of all, you can't -- I told you already that women aren'tgoing to get a chance to ask the next question. Where are you from?
  
Question: [Inaudible.]
President Obama: Well, you're still in Burma. All right. Where you from?  Sit down. Whereyou from? All right, let me -- I'm going to ask this guy, guy from the Philippines right here.Come on.  You just started yelling. I didn't even call on you. 
Question: Good afternoon, Mr. President. My name is Ryan Louis Madrid. I'm from thePhilippines. I'm one of the person you --
President Obama: I was just talking about you.
Question: Yes. And, yes, it gave me a little tear in my eyes. I thank you so much for puttingus -- making me as, like, one of the models maybe for what youth can do for change. But myquestion really is, I just learned recently that the U.S. and ASEAN will be making a climatechange statement. I'd like to know if you could tell us what this is all about, and how thiswould be different from the Kyoto Protocol and other climate change efforts in making realefforts towards curbing climate change. Thank you. 
President Obama: Good. So first of all, let's just establish the science and the facts. Theplanet is getting warmer. The reason the planet is getting warmer is because human activity isreleasing greenhouse gases that is trapping heat and increasing temperatures. And becauseyou start getting a negative feedback loop, as it gets hotter, ice melts. The permafrost inplaces like Siberia start releasing methane gases. Ice packs in Greenland start melting. Thatthen makes it even warmer. And we're on a trajectory in which the temperatures could rise sohigh that it would have catastrophic impacts around the world because temperatures startchanging, weather patterns shift. Traditional monsoon seasons might completely reversethemselves. Areas that once used to have arable land suddenly now have long droughts.Areas that used to be temperate suddenly get floods. We're seeing the impacts in developedcountries. We see it in my own country. And we're seeing impacts in poor countries. And we'reseeing impacts, obviously, in island nations where if the temperatures continue to rise, we'llend up with oceans that are two feet or three feet higher, and it could swallow up entirecountries.
So this is perhaps the central challenge, the most important challenge facing humanity in the21st century, is getting control of this.
Now, the good news is that we can begin to slow down that process so that the temperaturesonly go up a certain level, and although we'll have to make some adaptations, it doesn'tbecome catastrophic. But in order to do that, we have to start transitioning our economies toclean energy rather than dirty energy. It means that we have to start developing wind powerand solar power. It means that societies have to use energy more efficiently. It means that wehave to find ways to use safe nuclear power because they don't -- that doesn’t emitgreenhouse gases. So there's no single answer. There's a group of answers to the problem.
  
And some of you may be aware that the United States and China are the two biggest emittersin the world. The United States had been the biggest emitter; China overtook us. In fairnessto China, each individual Chinese person probably uses less energy and emits less greenhousegases than an individual American. But there are a lot more Chinese than there areAmericans.
And if, as China continues to develop, they start matching the United States in how muchcarbon they release, we'll never survive. None of us. Same is true with India -- just becauseof the size of its population. And the same is true with Southeast Asia, which, as I said before,contains one out of every 10 people in the world.
So all of us are going to have to be a part of this. And the United States and China -- in ameeting with President Xi -- we announced that we are both going to set bold targets forgreenhouse gas reductions from 2020 forward.
What we're encouraging ASEAN to do, individual ASEAN countries, is also to come up withgoals for how they are going to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. And if all countriesaround the world put forward ambitious goals at a Paris conference that we're going to behaving in 2015, then this can serve at the basis for collective action in reducing greenhousegases.
But although we know what we need to do, the transition will be difficult because -- just togive you one example -- Indonesia.
Audience Member: Yeah!
President Obama: You might not want to cheer about this -- has been cutting down itsforests at a very high rate in order to accommodate the palm oil industry. Now the palm oilindustry is very lucrative, and you have some very big landholders and big companies who aremaking a lot of money from the palm oil industry. And they create some jobs. But when youjust deforest entire sections of Sumatra or Borneo, that can end up having a devastatingeffect on the climate.
There are countries in ASEAN that subsidize energy. Now, oftentimes this is with the best ofintentions. The idea would be we want to make gasoline cheaper or electricity cheaper so thatpoor people can afford it. The problem is that when you subsidize energy, there's no incentiveto use less energy. So typically when you have a lot of fuel subsidies, those economies arevery inefficient in how they use energy, and they generate more pollution.
The countries that are most efficient in energy use, not only do they not subsidize energy -- infact, they tax energy use. So you look like -- in a country like Norway, which produces a lot ofoil, but gasoline there is still $6 or $7 a gallon, which in liters -- who wants to do a literconversion for me? Anyway, it's very expensive.
  
So part of what we hope each country in ASEAN commits to is to take the steps that will berequired to reduce or at least slow the growth of its carbon emissions, and then slowly startreducing them. And it doesn't have to be overnight, but the transition has to begin.
So if you look at a country like Indonesia, making a commitment to reduce deforestation,reduce and eventually end fuel subsidies, those two things alone could probably helpIndonesia meet a very bold carbon reduction goal.
In the United States, I've instructed my Environmental Protection Agency to regulate theamount of greenhouse gases that power plants can send into the atmosphere. And we'vedoubled fuel-efficiency standards on cars. So in a few years, by the middle of the nextcentury, by 2025, you won't be able to sell a car in the United States unless it is deliveringtwice as much mileage for every gallon of gas.
And so you can build in transition times to get this done. But we have to start now. And this isprobably a good place for me to end by just saying that the issue of climate change is aperfect example of why young people have to lead.
Because old people, they've created a mess, and then they'll be gone. And then you -- you'rethe ones who have to deal with it. And also what happens is old people get set in their ways.So the older you get, the more likely you are to say, that's how it's always been so that's howI'm going to keep on doing it -- even if there's a better way to do things.
Young people, they're asking, well, why do I have to do it that way? Let's try it this way. Andthat kind of willingness to accept challenges and try things in a new way, to not be stuck inthe past, or to look towards the future, that's what all of you represent.
So I'm hopeful that you have a chance to participate in our Young Southeast Asian LeadersInitiative Fellows Program. Maybe I'll see some of you in the United States. I'm sure all of youare going to do great things. And I hope all of you dream big and then work hard to achievethose dreams.
Okay? Thank you very much, everybody.
