Thank you so much, Strobe, for your extraordinary leadership here at Brookings, and thanksto all of you in attendance. 
Almost exactly one year ago, on a frigid winter's day, I met with my new economic team atthe headquarters of my presidential transition offices in Chicago.  And over the course of fourhours, my advisors presented an analysis of where the economy at that time stood,accompanied by a chilling set of charts and graphs, predicting where we might end up.  It wasan unforgettable series of presentations.
Christy Romer -- who's here today -- tapped to head the Council of Economic Advisers, as wellas Larry Summers, who I'd chosen to head the National Economic Council, described animminent downturn comparable in its severity to almost nothing since the 1930s.  TimGeithner, my incoming Treasury Secretary, reported that the financial system, shaken by thesubprime crisis, had halted almost all lending, which in turn threatened to pull the broadereconomy in a downward spiral.  Peter Orszag, my incoming Budget Director, closed out theproceedings with an entirely dismal report on the fiscal health of the country, with growingdeficits and debt stretching to the horizon.  Having concluded that it was too late for me torequest a recount -- I tasked my team with mapping out a plan to tackle the crisis on allfronts. 

It wasn't long after that meeting, as we shaped this economic plan, that we began to seesome of these forecasts materialize.  Over the previous year, it was obvious that folks werefacing hard times.  As I traveled across the country during the long campaign, I would meetmen and women bearing the brunt of not only a deepening recession, but also years -- evendecades -- of growing strains on middle class families.  But now the country was experiencingsomething far worse.  Our gross domestic product -- the sum total of all that our economyproduces  -- fell at the fastest rate in a quarter century.  Five trillion dollars of Americans'household wealth evaporated in just 12 weeks as stocks, pensions, and home valuesplummeted.  We were losing an average of 700,000 jobs each month, equivalent to thepopulation of the state of Vermont.  That was true in December, January, February, March. The fear among economists across the political spectrum that was -- was that we were rapidlyplummeting towards a second Great Depression.
So, in the weeks and months that followed, we undertook a series of difficult steps to preventthat outcome.  And we were forced to take those steps largely without the help of anopposition party, which, unfortunately, after having presided over the decision-making thathad led to the crisis, decided to hand it over to others to solve.
We acted to get lending flowing again so businesses could get loans to buy equipment, andordinary Americans could get financing to buy homes and cars, to go to college, and to startor run businesses.  We enacted measures to stem the tide of foreclosures in our housingmarket, helping responsible homeowners stay in their homes and helping to stop the broaderdecline in home values which was eating away at what tends to be a family's largest asset. 
To achieve this, and to prevent economic collapse, we were forced to extend assistance tosome of the very banks and financial institutions whose actions had helped precipitate theturmoil.  We also took steps to prevent the rapid dissolution of the American auto industry --which faced a crisis partly of its own making -- to prevent the loss of hundreds of thousandsof jobs during an already fragile, shaky time.  These were not decisions that were popular orsatisfying; these were decisions that were necessary.
Now, even as we worked to address the crises in our banking sector, in our housing market,and in our auto industry, we also began attacking our economic crisis on a broader front.  Lessthan one month after taking office we enacted the most sweeping economic recovery packagein history:  the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. 
The Recovery Act was divided into three parts.  One-third went for tax relief for smallbusinesses and 95 percent of working families.  Another third was for emergency relief to helpfolks who've borne the brunt of this recession.  We extended or increased unemploymentbenefits for more than 17 million Americans; made health insurance 65 percent cheaper forfamilies relying on COBRA. And for state and local governments facing historic budgetshortfalls as demand for services went up and revenues went down, we provided assistancethat has saved the jobs of hundreds of thousands of teachers and public school workers,firefighters and police officers.

The last third of the Recovery Act is for investments to put Americans to work doing the workthat America needs done:  doubling our capacity in renewable energy like wind and solar;computerizing medical records to save money and lives; providing the largest boost tomedical research in history; renovating classrooms and school laboratories; and upgradingroads and railways as part of the largest investment in infrastructure since the creation of theInterstate Highway System half a century ago.
And even as the Recovery Act has created jobs and spurred growth, we have not let up in ourefforts to take every responsible action to get the economy growing and America working. 
This fall, I signed into law more than $30 billion in tax cuts for struggling businesses,extended an effective tax credit for homebuyers, and provided additional unemploymentinsurance for one million Americans.  And the Treasury is continuing to adapt our financialstability plan, helping to facilitate the flow of small credit to small businesses and families.  Inaddition, we're working to break down barriers and open overseas markets so our companiescan better compete globally, creating jobs in America by exporting our products around theworld.
Now, partly as a result of these and other steps, we are in a very different place today thanwe were one year ago.  We may forget, but we're in a very different place.  We can safely saythat we are no longer facing the potential collapse of our financial system and we've avoidedthe depression many feared.  Our economy is growing for the first time in a year, and theswing from contraction to expansion since the beginning of the year is the largest in nearlythree decades. 
Finally, we're no longer seeing the severe deterioration in the job market that we once were. In fact we learned on Friday that the unemployment rate fell slightly last month.  This iswelcome news, and news made possible in part by the up to 1.6 million jobs that theRecovery Act has already created and saved according to the Congressional Budget Office.
But I'm here today because our work is far from done.  For even though we've reduced thedeluge of job losses to a relative trickle, we are not yet creating jobs at a pace to help allthose families who've been swept up in the flood.  There are more than 7 million fewerAmericans with jobs today than when this recession began.  That's a staggering figure, andone that reflects not only the depths of the hole from which we must ascend, but also acontinuing human tragedy. 
It was mentioned that I was in Allentown, Pennsylvania, this past weekend, and went to a jobcenter where people were engaged in job search.  And it ran the spectrum -- blacks, whites,Hispanics, young people who were just starting their careers, individuals 50, 60 years old,looking for a job.  And they were putting a brave face on it, confident that eventually thingswould work out, but you could also see the sense of anxiety, the fear that perhaps this time itwas different.

Sometimes it's hard to break out of the bubble here in Washington and remind ourselves thatbehind these statistics are people's lives, their capacity to do right by their families.  It speaksto an urgent need to accelerate job growth in the short term while laying a new foundation forlasting economic growth.
My economic team has been considering a full range of additional ideas to help accelerate thepace of private sector hiring.  We held a jobs forum at the White House that brought togethersmall business owners, CEOs, union members, economists, folks from non-profits, and stateand local officials to talk about job creation.  And I've asked people to lead forums in theirown communities -- sending the results to me -- so we are hearing as many voices as possibleas we refine our proposals.  We've already heard a number of good ideas, and I know we'lllearn of many more.
So today, I want to outline some of the broader steps that I believe should be at the heart ofour effort to accelerate job growth -- those areas that will generate the greatest number ofjobs while generating the greatest value for our economy.
First, we're proposing a series of steps to help small businesses grow and hire new staff.  Overthe past 15 years, small businesses have created roughly 65 percent of all new jobs inAmerica.  These are companies formed around kitchen tables in family meetings, formedwhen an entrepreneur takes a chance on a dream, formed when a worker decides it's time shebecame her own boss.  These are also companies that drive innovation, producing 13 timesmore patents per employee than large companies.  And it's worth remembering, every once ina while a small business becomes a big business -- and changes the world.
That's why it's so important that we help small business struggling to stay open, or strugglingto open in the first place, during these difficult times.  Building on the tax cuts in the RecoveryAct, we're proposing a complete elimination of capital gains taxes on small businessinvestment along with an extension of write-offs to encourage small businesses to expand inthe coming year.  And I believe it's worthwhile to create a tax incentive to encourage smallbusinesses to add and keep employees, and I'm going to work with Congress to pass one.
Now, these steps will help, but we also have to address the continuing struggle of smallbusinesses to get loans that they need to start up and grow.  To that end, we're proposing towaive fees and increase the guarantees for SBA-backed loans.  And I'm asking my TreasurySecretary to continue mobilizing the remaining TARP funds to facilitate lending to smallbusinesses.
Second, we're proposing a boost in investment in the nation's infrastructure beyond what wasincluded in the Recovery Act, to continue modernizing our transportation and communicationsnetworks.  These are needed public works that engage private sector companies, spurringhiring all across the country. 

Already, more than 10,000 of these projects have been funded through the Recovery Act. And by design, Recovery Act work on roads, bridges, water systems, Superfund sites,broadband networks, and clean energy projects will all be ramping up in the months ahead.  Itwas planned this way for two reasons:  so the impact would be felt over a two-year period;and, more importantly, because we wanted to do this right. 
The potential for abuse in a program of this magnitude, while operating at such a fast pace,was enormous.  So I asked Vice President Biden and others to make sure to the extenthumanly possible that the investments were sound, the projects worthy, and the executionefficient.  What this means is that we're going to see even more work -- and workers -- onrecovery projects in the next six months than we saw in the last six months.
Even so, there are many more worthy projects than there were dollars to fund them.  Irecognize that by their nature these projects often take time, and will therefore create jobsover time.  But the need for jobs will also last beyond next year and the benefits of theseinvestments will last years beyond that.  So adding to this initiative to rebuild America'sinfrastructure is the right thing to do. 
Third, I'm calling on Congress to consider a new program to provide incentives for consumerswho retrofit their homes to become more energy-efficient, which we know creates jobs, savesmoney for families, and reduces the pollution that threatens our environment.  And I'mproposing that we expand select Recovery Act initiatives to promote energy efficiency andclean energy jobs which have been proven to be particularly popular and effective. 
It's a positive sign that many of these programs drew so many applicants for funding that alot of strong proposals -- proposals that will leverage private capital and create jobs quickly --did not make the cut.  With additional resources, in areas like advanced manufacturing ofwind turbines and solar panels, for instance, we can help turn good ideas into good privatesector jobs.
Finally, as we are moving forward in these areas, we should also extend the relief in theRecovery Act, including emergency assistance to seniors, unemployment insurance benefits,COBRA, and relief to states and localities to prevent layoffs.  This will help folks weatheringthese storms, while boosting consumer spending and promoting job growth.
Of course, there's only so much government can do. Job creation will ultimately depend on thereal job creators:  businesses across America.  We were encouraged today to hear from theBusiness Roundtable that their survey showed greater confidence and greater potentialinvestment coming out of the business community. 
Government can help lay the groundwork on which the private sector can better generatejobs, growth, and innovation.  After all, small business tax relief is not a substitute foringenuity and industriousness by our entrepreneurs -- but it can help those with good ideas togrow and expand.

Incentives to promote energy efficiency and clean energy manufacturing don't automaticallycreate jobs or lower carbon emissions -- but these steps provide a framework in whichcompanies can compete and innovate to create those jobs and reduce energy consumption. And while modernizing the physical and virtual networks that connect us will create private-
sector jobs, they'll do so while making it possible for companies to more easily and effectivelymove their products across this country and around the world, and that will create more jobs.
And given the challenges of accelerating the pace of hiring in the private sector, thesetargeted initiatives are right and they are needed.  But with a fiscal crisis to match oureconomic crisis, we also must be prudent about how we fund it.  So to help support theseefforts, we are going to wind down the Troubled Asset Relief Program -- or TARP -- the fundcreated to stabilize the financial system so banks would lend again.
I don't think I have to tell you there has rarely been a less loved or more necessaryemergency program than TARP, which -- as galling as the assistance to banks may have been-- indisputably helped prevent a collapse of the entire financial system.  Launched hastily --understandably, but hastily -- under the last administration, the TARP program was flawed,and we have worked hard to correct those flaws and manage it properly.  And today, TARPhas served its original purpose and at much lower cost than we expected.
In fact, because of our stewardship of this program, and the transparency and accountabilitywe put in place, TARP is expected to cost the taxpayers at least $200 billion less than whatwas anticipated just this past summer.  And the assistance to banks, once thought to costtaxpayers untold billions, is on track to actually reap billions in profits for the taxpayingpublic.  So this gives us a chance to pay down the deficit faster than we thought possible andto shift funds that would have gone to help the banks on Wall Street to help create jobs onMain Street.
Small business, infrastructure, clean energy -- these are areas in which we can put Americansto work while putting our nation on a sturdier economic footing.  That foundation for sustainedeconomic growth -- that must be our continuing focus and our ultimate goal. 
I've said this before.  Even before this particular crisis, much of our growth for a decade ormore had been fueled by unsustainable consumer debt and reckless financial speculation,while we ignored the fundamental challenges that hold the key to our economic prosperity. We cannot simply go back to the way things used to be.  We can't go back to an economy thatyielded cycle after cycle of speculative booms and painful busts.  We can't continue to acceptan education system in which our students trail their peers in other countries, and a healthcare system in which exploding costs put our businesses at a competitive disadvantage.  Andwe cannot continue to ignore the clean energy challenge or cede global leadership in theemerging industries of the 21st century.  And that's why, even as we strive to meet the crisisof the moment, we have insisted on laying a new foundation for the future.

Because an educated workforce is essential to a 21st century global economy, we've launcheda competitive Race to the Top fund through the Recovery Act to reform our schools and raiseachievement, especially in math and science.  And we've made college more affordable,proposed a historic set of reforms and investments in community college, and set a goal ofonce again leading the world in producing college graduates by the year 2020.
Because even the best-trained worker in the world can't compete if our businesses aresaddled with rapidly increasing health care costs, we are fighting to do what we havediscussed in this country for generations -- finally reforming our nation's broken healthinsurance system and relieving this unsustainable burden.
Because our economic future depends on a financial system that encourages soundinvestments, honest dealings, and long-term growth, we've proposed the most ambitiousfinancial reforms since the Great Depression.  We'll set and enforce clear rules of the road,close loopholes in oversight, charge a new agency with protecting consumers and address thedangerous, systemic risks that brought us to the brink of disaster.  These reforms are movingthrough Congress, we're working to keep those reforms strong, and I'm looking forward tosigning them into law.
And because our economic future depends on our leadership in the industries of the future, weare investing in basic applied research, and working to create the incentives to build a newclean energy economy.  For we know the nation that leads in clean energy will be the nationthat leads the world.  I want America to be that nation.  I want America's prosperity to bepowered by what we invent and pioneer -- not just what we borrow and what we consume. And I know that we can and will be that nation if we are willing to do what it takes to getthere.
Now, there are those who claim we have to choose between paying down our deficits on theone hand, and investing in job creation and economic growth on the other.  This is a falsechoice.  Ensuring that economic growth and job creation are strong and sustained is critical toensuring that we are increasing revenues and decreasing spending on things likeunemployment insurance so that our deficits will start coming down.  At the same time,instilling confidence in our commitment to being fiscally prudent gives the private sector theconfidence to make long-term investments in our people and in America.
So one of the central goals of this administration is restoring fiscal responsibility.  Even as wehave had to spend our way out of this recession in the near term, we've begun to make thehard choices necessary to get our country on a more stable fiscal footing in the long run.  Solet me just be clear here.  Despite what some have claimed, the cost of the Recovery Act isonly a very small part of our current budget imbalance.  In reality, the deficit had beenbuilding dramatically over the previous eight years.  We have a structural gap between themoney going out and the money coming in.

Folks passed tax cuts and expansive entitlement programs without paying for any of it -- evenas health care costs kept rising, year after year.  As a result, the deficit had reached $1.3trillion when we walked into the White House.  And I'd note:  These budget-busting tax cutsand spending programs were approved by many of the same people who are now waxingpolitical about fiscal responsibility, while opposing our efforts to reduce deficits by gettinghealth care costs under control.  It's a sight to see.
The fact is we have refused to go along with business as usual; we are taking responsibilityfor every dollar we spend.  We've done what some said was impossible:  preventing wastefulspending on outdated weapons systems that even the Pentagon said it didn't want.  We'vecombed the budget, cutting waste and excess wherever we could.  I'm still committed tohalving the deficit we inherited by the end of my first term -- cutting it in half.
And I made clear from day one that I would not sign a health insurance reform bill if it raisedthe deficit by one dime -- and neither the House, nor the Senate bill does.  We've begun notonly changing policies in Washington, we've also begun to change the culture in Washington.
In the end, the economic crisis of the past year was not just the result of weaknesses in oureconomy.  It was also the result of weaknesses in our political system, because for decades,too many in Washington put off the hard decisions.  For decades, we've watched as efforts tosolve tough problems have fallen prey to the bitterness of partisanship, to prosaic concerns ofpolitics, to ever-quickening news cycles, to endless campaigns focused on scoring pointsinstead of meeting our common challenges.
We've seen the consequences of this failure of responsibility.  The American people have paida heavy price.  And the question we'll have to answer now is if we're going to learn from ourpast, or if -- even in the aftermath of disaster -- we're going to repeat those same mistakes. As the alarm bells fade, the din of Washington rises, as the forces of the status quo marshaltheir resources, we can be sure that answering this question will be a fight to the finish.  But Ihave every hope and expectation that we can rise to this moment, that we can transcend thefailures of the past, that we can once again take responsibility for our future.
Every night I read letters and e-mails sent to me from people across America -- ordinaryfolks, people who share their hopes and their hardships, their faith in this country, theirfrustration with what's happened in this economy.  I hear from small business owners worriedabout making payroll, keeping their doors open.  I hear from mothers and fathers, sons anddaughters, who've seen one or two or more family members out of work.  The toughest lettersare in children's handwriting -- kids write to me, my dad just lost a job; my grandma is sick,she can't afford health insurance -- kids who can't just be kids because they're worried aboutmom having her hours cut or dad losing a job, or a family without health insurance. 

These folks aren't looking for a handout, they're not looking for a bailout -- just like thosepeople I visited in Allentown -- all they're looking for is a chance to make their own way, towork, to succeed using their talents and skills.  And they're looking for folks in Washington tohave a seriousness of purpose that matches the reality of their struggle.
Everywhere I've gone, every stop I've made, there are people like this, men and women whohave faced misfortune, but who stand ready to build a better future:  students ready to learn,workers eager to work, scientists on the brink of discovery, entrepreneurs seeking the chanceto open a small business.  Everywhere I go, there are once-shuttered factories just waiting towhir back to life in burgeoning industries.  There is a nation ready to meet the challenges ofthis new age and to lead the world in this new century.  And as we look back on the progressof the past year, and look forward to the work ahead, I have every confidence that we will doexactly that.
These have been a tough two years.  And there will no doubt be difficult months ahead.  Butthe storms of the past are receding.  The skies are brightening.  And the horizon is beckoningonce more.
Thank you very much.