Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, members of the General Assembly, my fellow Illinoisans:  It’sactually kind of fun to start a speech like that twice in one month.
What an incredible privilege it is to address this chamber. And to Governor Rauner, SenatorDurbin, members of Congress, Speaker Madigan, Former Governor Pat Quinn, MayorLangfelder and the people of Springfield -- thank you for such a warm welcome as I comeback home.  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  It's good to be home.  Thank you,guys. Thank you.  Thank you.  It is great to see so many old friends like John Cullerton andEmil Jones.  I miss you guys.
It's great to be in the State Capitol.  Being here today calls to mind the first time I spoke onthe Senate floor, almost 20 years ago.  And I was passionate, idealistic, ready to make adifference.  Just to stand in that magnificent chamber was enough to fill me up with aheightened sense of purpose.
  
And I probably needed a little dose of reality when I first arrived.  So one day, I rose to speakabout a bill.  And I thought I’d made some compelling points, with irrefutable logic.  And I wasabout to sit down, feeling pretty good about myself, when Pate Philip sauntered over to mydesk.  Now, there are some young people here, so for those of you who don't remember, PatePhilip was the Senate Majority Leader at the time. He was a Marine, and big shock of whitehair, chomped on a cigar; was so politically incorrect that you don't even know how todescribe it.  But he always treated me well.  And he came by and he slapped me on the back,he said, "Kid, that was a pretty good speech.  In fact, I think you changed a lot of minds. Butyou didn’t change any votes."  Then he singled, and they gaveled, and we got blown out.
So that was my first lesson in humility.  The next came when I presented my own first bill.  Itwas a simple piece of legislation that would make it a lot easier for Illinois manufacturers tohire graduating community college students.  I didn’t know any serious opposition, so I askedfor a vote.  And what I got was a good hazing.  I assume that this custom still exists.
So a senior colleague put the vote on hold to ask, "Could you correctly pronounce your namefor me?  I’m having a little trouble with it."  "Obama," I said.  "Is that Irish?" he asked.  Andbeing in my early 30s at the time, I was a little cocky -- I said, "It will be when I runcountywide."  "That was a good joke," he said, but he wasn’t amused.  "This bill is still goingto die."
And he went on to complain that my predecessor’s name was easier to pronounce than mine,that I didn’t have cookies at my desk like she did, how would I ever expect to get any voteswithout having cookies on my desk.  "I definitely urge a no vote," he said, "whatever yourname is."
And for the next several minutes, the Senate debated on whether I should add an apostropheto my name for the Irish, or whether the fact that "Obama" ends in a vowel meant I actuallybelonged to the Italians -- and just how many trees had had to die to print this terrible,miserable bill, anyway.
And I was chastened.  And I said, "If I survive this event, I will be eternally grateful andconsider this a highlight of my legal and legislative career."  And I asked for a vote.  Andinitially the tote board showed that it was going down, but at the last minute it flipped and mybill passed.  But I was duly reminded that I was a freshman in the minority.  And I want tothank all my former colleagues in both chambers for not letting me forget it.
To be a rookie in the minority party, as I was, is not much fun in any legislature.  We werecalled "mushrooms" -- because we were kept in the dark and fed a lot of manure.  But onebenefit of being in such a position -- not being invited into the meetings where the big dealswere being made -- is that I had a lot of time to get to know my colleagues.  And many of uswere away from our families, and so we became friends.
  
We went to fish fries together.  We’d go to union halls.  We’d play in golf scrambles.  We hada great bipartisan poker game at the Illinois Manufacturer’s Association.  Boro Relijie wouldhost, and folks like Dave Luechtefeld and Terry Link, others would join in.  We’d eatdownstairs -- and I can’t say I miss the horseshoes.  But away from the glare of TV, or thetweets, or the GIFs of today’s media, what we discovered was that despite our surfacedifferences -- Democrats and Republicans, downstate hog farmers, inner-city AfricanAmericans, suburban businesspeople, Latinos from Pilsen or Little Village -- despite thosedifferences, we actually had a lot in common.  We cared about our communities.  We caredabout our families.  We cared about America.
We fought hard for our positions.  I don’t want to be nostalgic here -- we voted against eachother all the time.  And party lines held most of the time.  But those relationships, that trustwe’d built meant that we came at each debate assuming the best in one another and not theworst.
I was reminiscing with Christine Radogno -- we came in in the same class.  And we were onopposite sides of most issues, but I always trusted her and believed that she was a goodperson. And if we had a bill that we might be able to work together on, it was a pleasure towork with her on.  Or Dave Syverson, who -- we worked together on the Public Health andWelfare Committee, and we got some important work done that made a difference in people’slives.
And we didn’t call each other idiots or fascists who were trying to destroy America.  Becausethen we’d have to explain why we were playing poker or having a drink with an idiot or afascist who was trying to destroy America.
And that respect gave us room for progress.  And after I’d served here for six years, my partyfinally gained the majority. Emil Jones became the President of the Senate.  And by then, Ihad made some friends across the aisle -- like Kirk Dillard, who I believe is here today, andwe were able to pass the first serious ethics reform in 25 years.  And working closely with lawenforcement, who knew by then that we cared about cops and sheriffs and prosecutors.  Andworking with folks like John Cullerton, we passed Illinois’ first racial profiling law, which wasgood for police officers and minority communities.
And because someone like my friend, John Bouman, who worked at the Shriver Center onPoverty Law, helped us build coalitions across the state, including with business, and was ableto then reach out to Republicans, we were able to increase tax credits for the working poorand expand health insurance to children in need.
And we wouldn’t bend on our most deeply held principles, but we were willing to forgecompromises in pursuit of a larger goal. We were practical when we needed to be.  We couldfight like heck on one issue and then shake hands on the next.
  
Somebody like Jesse White was able to travel around the state and people didn’t even knowwhat party he was necessarily from because he brought so much joy with the tumblers andthe work that they were doing.
So I want you to know that this is why I’ve always believed so deeply in a better kind ofpolitics, in part because of what I learned here in this legislature.  Because of what I learnedtraveling across the state, visiting some of your districts, before I was running statewide,before I was a U.S. senator; learning all the corners of this state -- this most-representativeof states.  A state of small towns and rich farmland, and the world’s greatest city.  Amicrocosm of America, where Democrats and Republicans and independents, and good peopleof every ethnicity and every faith shared certain bedrock values.
I just saw a story the other day showing that if you rank all 50 states across categories likeeducation levels and household incomes, and race and religion, the one state that mostclosely mirrors America as a whole is Illinois, this state.
And I learned by talking to your constituents that if you were willing to listen, it was possibleto bridge a lot of differences.  I learned that most Americans aren’t following the ins and outsof the legislature carefully, but they instinctively know that issues are more complicated thanrehearsed sound bites; that they play differently in different parts of the state and in thecountry.  They understand the difference between realism and idealism; the differencebetween responsibility and recklessness. They had the maturity to know what can and cannotbe compromised, and to admit the possibility that the other side just might have a point.
And it convinced me that if we just approached our national politics the same way theAmerican people approach their daily lives –- at the workplace, at the Little League game; atchurch or the synagogue -- with common sense, and a commitment to fair play and basiccourtesy, that there is no problem that we couldn’t solve together.
And that was the vision that guided me when I first ran for the United States Senate.  That’sthe vision I shared when I said we are more than just a collection of red states and bluestates, but we are the United States of America.  And that vision is why, nine years ago today,on the steps of the Old State Capitol just a few blocks from here, I announced my candidacyfor President.
Now, over these nine years, I want you to know my faith in the generosity and thefundamental goodness of the American people has been rewarded and affirmed over and overand over again.  I’ve seen it in the determination of autoworkers who had been laid off butwere sure that they could once again be part of a great, iconic Americans industry.  I’ve seenit in the single mom who goes back to school even as she’s working and looking after her kidsbecause she wants a better life for that next generation.  I’ve seen it the vision and risk-
taking of small businessmen.  I’ve seen it time and time again in the courage of our troops.
  
But it’s been noted often by pundits that the tone of our politics hasn’t gotten better since Iwas inaugurated, in fact it’s gotten worse; that there’s still this yawning gap between themagnitude of our challenges and the smallness of our politics.  Which is why, in my final Stateof the Union address, and in the one before that, I had to acknowledge that one of my fewregrets is my inability to reduce the polarization and meanness in our politics.  I was able tobe part of that here and yet couldn’t translate it the way I wanted to into our politics inWashington.
And people ask me why I’ve devoted so much time to this topic.  And I tell them it’s not justbecause I’m President, and the polarization and the gridlock are frustrating to me.  The fact iswe’ve gotten a heck of a lot done these past seven years, despite the gridlock.  We saved theeconomy from a depression.  We brought back an auto industry from the brink ofcollapse.  We helped our businesses create 14 million new jobs over the past six years.  Wecut the unemployment rate from 10 percent to 4.9 percent.  We covered nearly 18 millionmore Americans with health insurance.  We ignited a clean energy revolution.  We got binLaden.  We brought the vast majority of our troops home to their families.  We got a lotdone.  We're still getting a lot done.
And our political system helped make these things possible, and the list could go on.  There’sno doubt America is better off today than when I took office.  I didn't want this to be a Stateof Union speech where we have the standing up and the sitting down.  Come on, guys, youknow better than that.  No, no, no, I’ve got a serious point to make here.  I’ve got a seriouspoint to make here because this is part of the issue, right?  We have an importation of ourpolitics nationally, and on cable and talk radio, and it seeps into everything.
The point I’m trying to make is I care about fixing our politics not only because I’m thePresident today, or because some of my initiatives have been blocked by Congress -- thathappens to every President, happens to every governor, happens to everybody whoparticipates -- anybody who participates in a democracy.  You're not going to get 100 percentof what you want all the time.
The reason this is important to me is, next year I’ll still hold the most important title of all,and that's the title of citizen.  And as an American citizen, I understand that our progress isnot inevitable -- our progress has never been inevitable.  It must be fought for, and won by allof us, with the kind of patriotism that our fellow Illinoisan, Adlai Stevenson, once describednot as a "short, frenzied outburst of emotion, but the tranquil and steady dedication of alifetime."  It requires citizenship and a sense that we are one.
And today that kind of citizenship is threatened by a poisonous political climate that pushespeople away from participating in our public life.  It turns folks off.  It discourages them,makes them cynical.  And when that happens, more powerful and extreme voices fill the void. When that happens, progress stalls.  And that’s how we end up with only a handful oflobbyists setting the agenda.
  
That’s how we end up with policies that are detached from what working families face everyday.  That’s how we end up with the well-connected who publicly demand that governmentstay out of their business but then whisper in its ear for special treatment.
That’s how our political system gets consumed by small things when we are a people that arecalled to do great things -- to give everybody a shot in a changing economy; to keep Americasafe and strong in an uncertain world; to repair our climate before it threatens everything weleave for our kids.
So that’s what’s on my mind as I come back to Illinois today.  This is what will be a focus ofmine over the course of this year and beyond:  What can we do, all of us, together, to try tomake our politics better?  And I speak to both sides on this.  As all of you know, it could bebetter, and all of you would feel prouder of the work you do if it was better.
So, first, let’s put to rest a couple of myths about our politics.  One is the myth that theproblems with our politics are new.  They are not.  American politics has never beenparticularly gentle or high-minded -- especially not during times of great change.
As I mentioned when I visited a mosque in Maryland last week, Thomas Jefferson’s opponenttried to stir things up by suggesting he was a Muslim.  So I’m in good company.  But that’snothing compared to the newspaper which warned that if Jefferson were elected, "murder,robbery, rape, adultery, and incest will be openly taught and practiced."  His Vice President,Aaron Burr, literally killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel.  I don’t even want to tell you whatAndrew Jackson’s opponents said about his mamma.  Lincoln, himself, was routinely called"weak, wishy-washy," a "yahoo," "an unshapely man," "the obscene ape of Illinois," and, myfavorite -- a "facetious pettifogger."  I don’t know what that means -- but it sounds insulting.
So, comparatively speaking, today is not that bad -- as long as you’ve got a thick skin.  AsHarold Washington once said:  "Politics ain't beanbag."  It’s tough.  And that’s okay.
There’s also the notion sometimes that our politics are broken because politicians aresignificantly more corrupt or beholden to big money than they used to be.  There’s no doubtthat lobbyists still have easier access to the halls of power than the averageAmerican.  There’s a lot of work that we need to do to make sure that the system works forordinary people and not just the well-connected.  That’s true at the federal level; that’s true atthe state level.  Folks aren’t entirely wrong when they feel as if the system too often is riggedand does not address their interests.
But, relative to the past, listen, I’m confident we’ve got enough rules and checks to preventanyone in my Cabinet from siphoning whiskey tax revenue into their own pockets likePresident Grant’s administration did.  Until FDR went after the ward bosses of Tammany Hall,they controlled judges and politicians as they pleased -- patronage, bribery, and moneylaundering.  It’s not as easy as it was to whip up tens of thousands of phantom votes, whetherin Chicago or South Texas.
  
From the Teapot Dome to Watergate, history tells us we should always be vigilant anddemand that our public servants follow the highest ethical standards.  But the truth is that thekind of corruption that is blatant, of the sort that we saw in the past, is much less likely intoday’s politics.  And the Justice Department and the media work hard to keep it thatway.  And that’s a very good thing.  So we don’t want to romanticize the past and thinksomehow it’s a difference in the people being elected.
And it also isn’t true that today’s issues are inherently more polarizing than the past.  Iremember, we endured four years of Civil War that resulted in hundreds of thousands of deadAmericans.  This country was divided on a fundamental question. Before Pearl Harbor,entering into World War II was a highly charged debate.  The fault lines of Vietnam, theculture wars of the ‘60s -- they still echo into our politics a half-century later.
We’ve been arguing since our founding over the proper size and role of government; themeaning of individual freedom and equality; over war and peace, and the best way to give allof our citizens opportunity.  And these are important debates that everybody should join, withall the rigor that a free people require.
My point is, the problem is not that politicians are worse, the problem is not that the issuesare tougher.  And so it’s important for us to understand that the situation we find ourselves intoday is not somehow unique or hopeless.  We’ve always gone through periods when ourdemocracy seems stuck.  And when that happens, we have to find a new way of doingbusiness.
We’re in one of those moments.  We’ve got to build a better politics -- one that’s less of aspectacle and more of a battle of ideas; one that’s less of a business and more of a mission;one that understands the success of the American experiment rests on our willingness toengage all our citizens in this work.
And that starts by acknowledging that we do have a problem. And we all know it.  What’sdifferent today is the nature and the extent of the polarization.  How ideologically divided theparties are is brought about by some of the same long-term trends in our politics and ourculture.  The parties themselves have become more homogenous than ever.  A great sortinghas taken place that drove Southern conservatives out of the Democratic Party, Northernmoderates out of the Republican Party, so you don’t have within each party as much diversityof views.
And you’ve got a fractured media.  Some folks watch FOX News; some folks read theHuffington Post.  And very often, what’s profitable is the most sensational conflict and themost incendiary sound bites.  And we can choose our own facts.  We don’t have a commonbasis for what’s true and what’s not.  I mean, if I listened to some of these conservativepundits, I wouldn’t vote for me either.  I sound like a scary guy.
  
You’ve got advocacy groups that, frankly, sometimes benefit from keeping their membersagitated as much as possible, assured of the righteousness of their cause.  Unlimited darkmoney -- money that nobody knows where it’s coming from, who’s paying -- drowns outordinary voices.  And far too many of us surrender our voices entirely by choosing not tovote.  And this polarization is pervasive and it seeps into our society to the point wheresurveys even suggest that many Americans wouldn’t want their kids to date someone fromanother political party.  Now, some of us don’t want our kids dating, period.  But that’s alosing battle.
But this isn’t just an abstract problem for political scientists.  This has real impact on whetheror not we can get things done together.  This has a real impact on whether families are ableto support themselves, or whether the homeless are getting shelter on a cold day.  It makes adifference as to the quality of the education that kids are getting.  This is not an abstraction.
But so often, these debates, particularly in Washington but increasingly in state legislatures,become abstractions.  It’s as if there are no people involved, it’s just cardboard cutouts andcaricatures of positions.  It encourages the kind of ideological fealty that rejects anycompromise as a form of weakness.  And in a big, complicated democracy like ours, if wecan’t compromise, by definition, we can’t govern ourselves.
Look, I am a progressive Democrat.  I am proud of that.  I make no bones about it.   I’mgoing to make another point here.  I believe that people should have access to health care.  Ibelieve they should have access to a good public education.  I believe that workers deserve ahigher minimum wage. I believe that collective bargaining is critical to the prospects of themiddle class, and that pensions are vital to retirement, as long as they’re funded responsibly.
Hold on a second.  Hold on a second.  Sit down, Democrats.  Sit down.  Sit down -- just for asecond.  I appreciate that, but I want to make this larger point.
I believe we’re judged by how we care for the poor and the vulnerable.  I believe that in orderto live up to our ideals, we have to continually fight discrimination in all its forms.   I believein science, and the science behind things like climate change, and that a transition to cleanersources of energy will help preserve the planet for future generations.
I believe in a tough, smart foreign policy that says America will never hesitate to protect ourpeople and our allies, but that we should use every element of our power and never rush towar.
Those are the things I believe.  But here’s the point I want to make.  I believe that there are alot of Republicans who share many of these same values, even though they may disagree withme on the means to achieve them.  I think sometimes my Republican colleagues makeconstructive points about outdated regulations that may need to be changed, or programsthat even though well-intended, didn't always work the way they were supposed to.
  
And where I’ve got an opportunity to find some common ground, that doesn’t make me asellout to my own party.  That applies -- well, we’ll talk later, Duncan.  This is what happens,everybody starts cherry-picking.  One thing I’ve learned is folks don't change.
So trying to find common ground doesn't make me less of a Democrat or less of aprogressive.  It means I’m trying to get stuff done.
And the same applies to a Republican who, heaven forbid, might agree with me on a particularissue -- or if I said America is great, decided to stand during a State of Union.  It’s not acontroversial proposition.  You're not going to get in trouble.
But the fact that that's hard to do is a testament to how difficult our politics hasbecome.  Because folks are worried, well, I’m going to get yelled at by you, or this blogger isgoing to write that, or this talk show host is going to talk about me, and suddenly I’ve got tochallenger, and calling me a RINO or a not a real progressive.
So when I hear voices in either party boast of their refusal to compromise as anaccomplishment in and of itself, I’m not impressed.  All that does is prevent what mostAmericans would consider actual accomplishments -- like fixing roads, educating kids, passingbudgets, cleaning our environment, making our streets safe.
It cuts both ways, guys.  See, suddenly everybody is standing.  This is fascinating towatch. The point is, it cuts both ways.
Our Founders trusted us with the keys to this system of self-government.  Our politics is theplace where we try to make this incredible machinery work; where we come together to settleour differences and solve big problems, do big things together that we could not possibly doalone.  And our Founders anchored all this in a visionary Constitution that separates powerand demands compromise, precisely to prevent one party, or one wing of a party, or onefaction, or some powerful interests from getting 100 percent of its way.
So when either side makes blanket promises to their base that it can’t possibly meet -- taxcuts without cuts to services -- "everything will be fine, but we won’t spend any money" --war without shared sacrifice -- "we’re going to be tough, but don’t worry, it will be fine" --union bashing or corporate bashing without acknowledging that both workers and businessesmake our economy run -- that kind of politics means that the supporters will be perenniallydisappointed.  It only adds to folks’ sense that the system is rigged.  It’s one of the reasonswhy we see these big electoral swings every few years.  It’s why people are so cynical.
Now, I don’t pretend to have all the answers to this.  These trends will not changeovernight.  If I did, I would have already done them through an executive action.  That wasjust a joke, guys.  Relax.   A sense of humor is also helpful.
  
But I do want to offer some steps that we can take that I believe would help reform ourinstitutions and move our system in a way that helps reflect our better selves.  And thesearen’t particularly original, but I just want to go ahead and mention them.
First is to take, or at least reduce, some of the corrosive influence of money in our politics.
Now, this year, just over 150 families -- 150 families -- have spent as much on thepresidential race as the rest of America combined.  Today, a couple of billionaires in one statecan push their agenda, dump dark money into every state -- nobody knows where it’s comingfrom -- mostly used on these dark ads, everybody is kind of dark and the worst picturepossible.  And there’s some ominous voice talking about how they’re destroying the country.
And they spend this money based on some ideological preference that really is disconnectedto the realities of how people live.  They’re not that concerned about the particulars of what’shappening in a union hall in Galesburg, and what folks are going through trying to find ajob.  They’re not particularly familiar with what’s happening at a VFW post.  [Phonerings.]  Somebody’s phone is on. In Carbondale.  They haven’t heard personally from farmersoutside of the Quads and what they’re going through.  Those are the voices that should beoutweighing a handful of folks with a lot of money.  I’m not saying the folks with a lot ofmoney should have no voice; I’m saying they shouldn’t be able to drown out everybody else’s.
And that’s why I disagree with the Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision.  I don’t believethat money is speech, or that political spending should have no limits, or that it shouldn’t bedisclosed.  I still support a constitutional amendment to set reasonable limits on financialinfluence in America’s elections.
But amending the Constitution is an extremely challenging and time-consuming process -- asit should be.  So we’re going to have to come up with more immediate ways to reduce theinfluence of money in politics.  There are a lot of good proposals out there, and we have towork to find ones that can gain some bipartisan support -- because a handful of families andhidden interests shouldn’t be able to bankroll elections in the greatest democracy on Earth.
The second step towards a better politics is rethinking the way that we draw our congressionaldistricts.  Now, let me point this out -- I want to point this out, because this is another case ofcherry-picking here.  This tends to be popular in states where Democrats have been drawingthe lines among Republicans, and less popular among Republicans where they control drawingthe lines.  So let’s be very clear here -- nobody has got clean hands on this thing. Nobody hasgot clean hands on this thing.
The fact is, today technology allows parties in power to precision-draw constituencies so thatthe opposition’s supporters are packed into as few districts as possible.  That’s why ourdistricts are shaped like earmuffs or spaghetti.  It’s also how one party can get more seatseven when it gets fewer votes.
  
And while this gerrymandering may insulate some incumbents from a serious challenge fromthe other party, it also means that the main thing those incumbents are worried about arechallengers from the most extreme voices in their own party.  That’s what’s happened inCongress.  You wonder why Congress doesn’t work?  The House of Representatives there,there may be a handful -- less than 10 percent -- of districts that are even competitive at thispoint.  So if you’re a Republican, all you’re worried about is what somebody to your right issaying about you, because you know you’re not going to lose a general election.  Same is truefor a lot of Democrats.  So our debates move away from the middle, where most Americansare, towards the far ends of the spectrum.  And that polarizes us further.
Now, this is something we have the power to fix.  And once the next census rolls around andwe have the most up-to-date picture of America’s population, we should change the way ourdistricts are drawn.  In America, politicians should not pick their voters; voters should picktheir politicians.  And this needs to be done across the nation, not just in a select fewstates.  It should be done everywhere.
Now, the more Americans use their voice and participate, the less captive our politics will beto narrow constituencies.  No matter how much undisclosed money is spent, no matter howmany negative ads are run, no matter how unrepresentative a district is drawn, if everybodyvoted, if a far larger number of people voted, that would overcome in many ways some ofthese other institutional barriers.  It would make our politics better.
And that’s why a third step towards a better politics is making voting easier, not harder; andmodernizing it for the way that we live now.
Now, this shouldn’t be controversial, guys.  You liked the redistricting thing, but not lettingpeople vote.  I should get some applause on that, too.
Listen, three years ago, I set up a bipartisan commission to improve the voting experience inAmerica.  It had the election lawyers from my campaign and from Mitt Romney’scampaign.  They got together outside of the context of immediate politics.  And I actuallywant to thank this assembly for moving to adopt some of its recommendations.  Thanks to thegood work of my dear friend, Senator Don Harmon, and many of you, there’s a new law goinginto effect this year that will allow Illinoisans to register and vote at the polls on Election Day. It expands early voting -- something that makes it a lot easier for working folks and busyparents to go vote.
Think about it.  If you’re a single mom, and you’ve got to take public transportation to puncha clock, work round the clock, get home, cook dinner on a Tuesday in bad weather -- that’stough.  Why would we want to make it so that she couldn’t do it on a Saturday or a Sunday? How is that advancing our democracy?
So this law will make a difference.  I’m proud of my home state for helping to lead the way.
  
And we know this works.  In 2012 and 2014, the states with the highest voter turnout all hadsame-day registration.  So today, I ask every state in America to join us -- reduce thesebarriers to voting.  Make it easier for your constituents to get out and vote.
And I’d encourage this assembly to take the next step.  Senator Manar and RepresentativeGabel have bills that would automatically register every eligible citizen to vote when theyapply for a driver’s license.  That will protect the fundamental right of everybody.  Democrats,Republicans, independents, seniors, folks with disabilities, the men and women of our military-- it would make sure that it was easier for them to vote and have their vote counted.
And as one of your constituents, I think you should pass that legislation right away.  I thinkthe Governor should sign it without delay.  Let’s make the Land of Lincoln a leader in voterparticipation.  That's something we should be proud to do.  Let’s set the pace -- encourageother states across the country to follow our lead, making automatic voter registration thenew norm across America.
Now, just during the course of this talk, it’s been interesting to watch the dynamics,obviously.  In part because so much of our politics now is just designed for short-term,tactical gain.  If you think that having more voters will hurt you on Election Day, thensuddenly you're not interested in participation.  And if you think that the gerrymandering ishelping you instead of hurting you, then you're not for those proposals.
We get trapped in these things.  We know better.  If we were setting up a set of rules aheadof time, and you didn't know where you stood, which party you were going to be in, if youdidn't have all the data and the poll numbers to tell you what’s going to give you an edge ornot, you’d set up a system that was fair.  You’d encourage everybody to be part of it.  That'swhat we learned in our civics books.  That's how it should work.
The fact that we can't do that, that brings me to my last point, which is, even as we changethe way system works, we also have a responsibility to change the way that we, as electedofficials and as citizens, work together.  Because this democracy only works when we get bothright -- when the system is fair, but also when we build a culture that is trying to make itwork.
Recently, I’ve been thinking a lot about something a friend of mine, Deval Patrick, once saidto his constituents when he was governor of Massachusetts.  He said, "Insist from us and fromeach other a modicum of civility as the condition for serving you."  This is what he toldvoters.  "Insist on us having a modicum of civility."
I think that’s something that all of us, as Americans, have to insist from each other.  Ourchildren are watching what we do. They don’t just learn it in school, they learn it by watchingus -- the way we conduct ourselves, the way we treat each other.  If we lie about each other,they learn it’s okay to lie.
  
If we make up facts and ignore science, then they just think it’s just their opinion thatmatters.  If they see us insulting each other like school kids, then they think, well, I guessthat's how people are supposed to behave.  The way we respect -- or don’t -- each other ascitizens will determine whether or not the hard, frustrating, but absolutely necessary work ofself-government continues.
I’ve got daughters that are getting older now, and one of the most important things aboutbeing a parent I think is them just seeing what you do not when you're out in public, notwhen you're dealing with somebody important, but just how do you do -- how do you treatpeople generally.  And it makes me much more mindful.  I want to live up to theirexpectations.
And in that same way, I want this democracy to live up to the people’s expectations.  We can'tmove forward if all we do is tear each other down.  And the political incentives, as they aretoday, too often rewards that kind of behavior.  That's what gets attention.  So it will requiresome courage just to act the way our parents taught us to act.  It shouldn’t, but in thispolitical environment apparently it does.  We’ve got to insist to do better from each other, foreach other.
Rather than reward those who’d disenfranchise any segment of America, we’ve got to insistthat everybody arm themselves with information, and facts, and that they vote.  If 99 percentof us voted, it wouldn’t matter how much the 1 percent spends on our elections.
Rather than reward the most extreme voices, or the most divisive language, or who is best atlaunching schoolyard taunts, we should insist on a higher form of discourse in our commonlife, one based on empathy and respect, -- which does not mean you abandon principle.  Itdoesn't mean you're not tough.
Rather than paint those who disagree with us as motivated by malice, to suggest that any ofus lack patriotism -- we can insist, as Lincoln did, that we are not enemies, but friends; thatour fellow Americans are not only entitled to a different point of view, but that they love thiscountry as much as we do.
Rather than reward a 24/7 media that so often thrives on sensationalism and conflict, we haveto stand up and insist, no, reason matters, facts matter; issues are complicated.  When folksjust make stuff up, they can’t go unchallenged.  And that’s true for Democrats if you hear aDemocratic make something up, and that’s true for a Republican if you see a Republican crossthat line.
Rather than accept the notion that compromise is a sellout to one side, we’ve got to insist onthe opposite -- that it can be a genuine victory that means progress for all sides. And ratherthan preventing our kids from dating people in other parties -- well, I may have issues aboutdating, generally -- but we can trust that we’ve raised our kids to do the right thing, and tolook at the qualities of people’s character, not some label attached to them.
  
And maybe, most of all, whenever someone begins to grow cynical about our politics, orbelieves that their actions can’t make a difference or it’s not worth participating in, we’ve gotto insist, even against all evidence to the contrary, that in fact they can make adifference.  And in this job of being a citizen of the United States of America, that’s a bigdeal.  It's something we should revere and take seriously.
Abraham Lincoln wasn’t always the giant that we think of today.  He lacked formalschooling.  His businesses and his law practices often struggled.  After just one term inCongress, his opposition to the Mexican-American War damaged his reputation so badly he didnot run for reelection.  He was denounced as a traitor, a demagogue, an enemysympathizer.  He returned to his law practice and admitted he was losing interest in politicsentirely.
And then something happened that shook his conscience.  Congress effectively overturned theMissouri Compromise, that flawed and fragile law that had prohibited slavery in the North andlegalized it in the South, but left the question ultimately unsettled.  And stunned by this news,Lincoln said he’d been roused "as he had never been before" over what it meant for America’sfuture.
And so, here in Springfield, at the state fair, he got back in the game and he delivered thefirst of his great anti-slavery speeches to a crowd of thousands.  And over the next six years,even as he lost two more political races, his arguments with Douglas and others shaped thenational debate.  That’s when he uttered those brilliant words on the steps of the Old StateCapitol that "A house divided against itself cannot stand;" that "this government cannotendure, permanently, half slave and half free."
He became the first Republican President, and I believe our greatest President.  And throughhis will and his words and, most of all, his character, he held a nation together and he helpedfree a people.
And those victories did not solve all of our problems.  He would be attacked at times for thecompromises he was prepared to make by abolitionists and folks from his own side.  It wouldbe 100 years more until the law guaranteed African Americans the equal rights that they hadbeen promised.  Even 50 years after that, our march is not yet finished.  But because Lincolnmade that decision not to give up, and not to let other voices speak for him, and because heheld in his mind the strength of principle but the vision, the ability to understand those whodisagreed with him, and showed them respect even as he fought them -- because of what heset in motion, generations of free men and women of all races and walks of life have had thechance to choose this country’s course.  What a great gift.  What a great legacy he hasbestowed up.
  
And that’s the thing about America.  We are a constant work of progress.  And our successhas never been certain, none of our journey has been preordained.  And there’s always been agap between our highest ideals and the reality that we witness every single day.  But whatmakes us exceptional -- what makes us Americans -- is that we have fought wars, and passedlaws, and reformed systems, and organized unions, and staged protests, and launched mightymovements to close that gap, and to bring the promise and the practice of America into closeralignment.  We’ve made the effort to form that "more perfect union."
Nine years to the day that I first announced for this office, I still believe in that politics ofhope.  And for all the challenges of a rapidly changing world, and for all the imperfections ofour democracy, the capacity to reach across our differences and choose that kind of politics --not a cynical politics, not a politics of fear, but that kind of politics -- sustained over thetranquil and steady dedication of a lifetime, that’s something that remains entirely up to us.
Thank you, Illinois.  God bless you.  God bless America.
It’s good to see all you.  I miss you guys.
