Hello!  Hello, everybody!  Thank you so much.  Thank you. Thank you very much.  Everybody,please have a seat.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Let me just begin by making a fewacknowledgements.  First of all, I've got some outstanding fathers here in the first row whoaren’t seeing their kids enough because I'm working them all the time -- three members ofmy Cabinet:  Secretary of the Treasury Tim Geithner --  Attorney General Eric Holder -- andSecretary of Commerce Gary Locke are here.
In addition, we've got one of my heroes and I'm sure one of yours, somebody whoseshoulders I stand on and allowed me to become President of the United States, and that'sCongressman from the great state of Georgia, John Lewis, is here.  A fierce advocate onbehalf of the District of Columbia, Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton is here.
I want to acknowledge the Mayor of Washington, D.C., Adrian Fenty in the house.  Theexecutive director of ARC, Edmund Fleet, is here.  I want to thank all the panel discussionparticipants who are involved in today’s events, and I want to thank Nurney Mason -- aWashington, D.C. icon.  Nurney founded Mason’s Barbershop in 1961.  That's the year I wasborn.  It’s still going strong.  He is here with his children and his grandchildren.  Where is he? There he is right there.  I could use a little trim.
  
One year ago this week, we kicked off a national conversation on fatherhood and personalresponsibility, and members of our administration fanned out all across the country to hearfrom fathers and families about the challenges that they face.  Secretary Arne Duncan, ourSecretary of Education, held a discussion in New Hampshire about the link betweenfatherhood and educational achievement.  Gary Locke talked to fathers in California aboutbalancing the needs of their families with the demands of their jobs.  Secretary Shinseki, ofVeterans Affairs, held a town hall for military and veteran dads in North Carolina.  AndAttorney General Holder traveled to Georgia for a forum about fathers in our criminal justicesystem. 
And in each of these places, each of these leaders posed a simple question:  How can we as anation -- not just the government, but businesses and community groups and concernedcitizens -- how can we all come together to help fathers meet their responsibilities to ourfamilies and communities?
And we did this because we know the vital role fathers play in the lives of our children. Fathers are our first teachers and coaches -- or in my house, assistant teachers and assistantcoaches -- to mom.  But they’re our mentors, our role models.  They show us by the examplethey set the kind of people they want us to become. 
But we also know that what too many fathers being absent means -- too many fathersmissing from too many homes, missing from too many lives.  We know that when fathersabandon their responsibilities, there’s harm done to those kids.  We know that children whogrow up without a father are more likely to live in poverty.  They're more likely to drop out ofschool.  They're more likely to wind up in prison.  They’re more likely to abuse drugs andalcohol.  They’re more likely to run away from home.  They’re more likely to become teenageparents themselves.
And I say all this as someone who grew up without a father in my own life.  He left my familywhen I was two years old.  And while I was lucky to have a wonderful mother and lovinggrandparents who poured everything they had into me and my sister, I still felt the weight ofthat absence.  It’s something that leaves a hole in a child’s life that no government can fill. 
So we can talk all we want here in Washington about issues like education and health careand crime; we can build good schools; we can put money into creating good jobs; we can doeverything we can to keep our streets safe -- but government can’t keep our kids from lookingfor trouble on those streets.   Government can’t force a kid to pick up a book or make surethat the homework gets done.  Government can’t be there day in, day out, to providediscipline and guidance and the love that it takes to raise a child.  That’s our job as fathers, asmothers, as guardians for our children.
  
The fact is, it’s easy to become a father, technically -- any guy can do that.  It’s hard to liveup to the lifelong responsibilities that come with fatherhood.  And it’s a challenge even in goodtimes, when our families are doing well.  It’s especially difficult when times are tough, familiesare straining just to keep everything together. 
In a time of war, many of our military families are stretched thin, with fathers doing multipletours of duty far away from their children.  In difficult economic times, a lot of fathers areworried about whether they’re going to be able to keep their job, or find a job, or whetherthey’ll be able to pay the bills and give their children the kinds of opportunities that if theydidn’t have them themselves, at least they wished for their children.  And there are a lot ofmen who are out of work and wrestling with the shame and frustration that comes when youfeel like you can’t be the kind of provider you want to be for the people that you love. 
But here’s the key message I think all of us want to send today to fathers all across thecountry:  Our children don’t need us to be superheroes.  They don’t need us to be perfect. They do need us to be present.  They need us to show up and give it our best shot, no matterwhat else is going on in our lives.  They need us to show them -- not just with words, but withdeeds -- that they, those kids, are always our first priority.
Those family meals, afternoons in the park, bedtime stories; the encouragement we give, thequestions we answer, the limits we set, the example we set of persistence in the face ofdifficulty and hardship -- those things add up over time, and they shape a child’s character,build their core, teach them to trust in life and to enter into it with confidence and with hopeand with determination.  And that’s something they’ll always carry with them:  that love thatwe show not with money, or fame, or spectacular feats, but through small daily acts -- thelove we show and that we earn by being present in the lives of our children.
Now, unfortunately, the way we talk about fatherhood in this country doesn’t always reinforcethese truths.  When we talk about issues like child care and work-family balance, we call them“women’s issues” and “mothers’ issues.”  Too often when we talk about fatherhood andpersonal responsibility, we talk about it in political terms, in terms of left and right,conservative/liberal, instead of what’s right and what’s wrong.  And when we do that, we’vegotten off track.  So I think it’s time for a new conversation around fatherhood in this country.
We can all agree that we’ve got too many mothers out there forced to do everything all bythemselves.  They’re doing a heroic job, often under trying circumstances.  They deserve a lotof credit for that.  But they shouldn’t have to do it alone.  The work of raising our children isthe most important job in this country, and it’s all of our responsibilities -- mothers andfathers.
Now, I can’t legislate fatherhood -- I can’t force anybody to love a child.  But what we can dois send a clear message to our fathers that there is no excuse for failing to meet theirobligations.
  
What we can do is make it easier for fathers who make responsible choices and harder forthose who avoid those choices.  What we can do is come together and support fathers whoare willing to step up and be good partners and parents and providers. 
And that’s why today we’re launching the next phase of our work to promote responsiblefatherhood -- a new, nationwide Fatherhood and Mentoring Initiative.  This is a call to actionwith cities and states, with individuals and organizations across the country -- from the NFLPlayers Association to the National PTA, to everyday moms and dads -- we’re raisingawareness about responsible fatherhood and working to re-engage absent fathers with theirfamilies. 
As part of this effort, we’ve proposed a new and expanded Fatherhood, Marriage and FamiliesInnovation Fund.  And we plan to seek out and support the very best, most successfulinitiatives in our states and communities -- those that are offering services like job training, orparenting skills classes, domestic violence prevention -- all which help provide the kind ofnetwork of support for men, particularly those in vulnerable communities. 
We’re also going to help dads who get caught up -- we want to make sure that they're caughtup on child support payments and that we re-engage them in their children’s lives.  We’regoing to support efforts to build healthy relationships between parents as well -- because weknow that children benefit not just from loving mothers and loving fathers, but from strongand loving marriages as well.
We’re also launching a new transitional jobs initiative for ex-offenders and low-income, non-
custodial fathers -- because these are men who often face serious barriers to finding work andkeeping work.  We’ll help them develop the skills and experience they need to move into full-
time, long-term employment, so they can meet their child support obligations and helpprovide for their families.
And under Eric Holder’s direction, our Justice Department is planning to create its first“Fathering Re-Entry Court” for ex-offender dads -- and to help replicate this program in courtsacross the country.  The idea here is very simple:  to reach fathers right as they’re leaving thecriminal justice system and connect them immediately to the employment and services theyneed to start making their child support payments and reconnecting them with their families. 
This program was inspired by leaders like Peter Spokes, who was the executive director of theNational Center for Fathering -- a good friend to many in our administration, all of whom weredeeply saddened by his recent passing.  And we are honored to have Peter’s wife, Barbara,with us here today.  Where’s Barbara?  I just saw her earlier.  There she is.  Thank you.
So these initiatives are a good start.  But ultimately, we know that the decision to be a goodfather -- that’s up to us, each of us, as individuals.
  
It’s one that men across this country are making every single day -- attending those schoolassemblies; parent-teacher conferences; coaching soccer, Little League; scrimping andsaving, and working that extra shift so that their children can go to college.  And plenty offathers -- and men who aren’t fathers as well -- are stepping up to serve as mentors andtutors and big brothers and foster parents to young people who don’t have any responsibleadult in their lives.   
Even when we give it our best efforts, there will still be plenty of days of struggle andheartache when we don’t quite measure up -- talking to the men here now.  Even with all thegood fortune and support Michelle and I have had in our lives, I’ve made plenty of mistakes asa parent.  I’ve lost count of all the times when the demands of work have taken me from theduties of fatherhood.  And I know I’ve missed out on moments in my daughters’ lives that I’llnever get back, and that’s a loss that’s hard to accept. 
But I also know the feeling that one author described when she wrote that “to have a child…isto decide forever to have your heart go walking around outside your body.”  Think about that-- to have a child is to have your heart walking around outside your body.
I’m sure a lot of fathers here know that same memory that I have, of driving home withMichelle and Malia right after she was born, going about 10 miles an hour.  Your emotionsswinging between unadulterated joy and sheer terror.  And I made a pledge that day that Iwould do everything I could to give my daughter what I never had -- that if I could beanything in life, I would be a good father.
And like a lot of the men here, since that time I’ve found there’s nothing else in my life thatcompares to the pleasures I take in spending time with my girls.  Nothing else comes close tothe pride I feel in their achievement and the satisfaction I get in watching them grow intostrong, confident young women.
Over the course of my life, I have been an attorney, I’ve been a professor, I’ve been a statesenator, I’ve been a U.S. senator -- and I currently am serving as President of the UnitedStates.  But I can say without hesitation that the most challenging, most fulfilling, mostimportant job I will have during my time on this Earth is to be Sasha and Malia’s dad.
So you don’t need a fancy degree for that.  You don’t need a lot of money for that.  No matterwhat doubts we may feel, what difficulties we may face, we all have to remember being afather -- it’s not just an obligation and a responsibility; it is a privilege and a blessing, onethat we all have to embrace as individuals and as a nation.
So, Happy Father’s Day, everybody.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.
