Thank you very much. Everybody, please have a seat. Sorry we’re running just a little bitbehind, but I figured it’s a great day to enjoy the Rose Garden.
Today, members of Congress have a simple choice to make: They can stand with the big oilcompanies, or they can stand with the American people. 
Right now, the biggest oil companies are raking in record profits –- profits that go up everytime folks pull up into a gas station. But on top of these record profits, oil companies are alsogetting billions a year -- billions a year in taxpayer subsidies -- a subsidy that they’ve enjoyedyear after year for the last century.
Think about that. It’s like hitting the American people twice. You’re already paying a premiumat the pump right now. And on top of that, Congress, up until this point, has thought it was agood idea to send billions of dollars more in tax dollars to the oil industry.
It’s not as if these companies can’t stand on their own. Last year, the three biggest U.S. oilcompanies took home more than $80 billion in profits. Exxon pocketed nearly $4.7 millionevery hour. And when the price of oil goes up, prices at the pump go up, and so do thesecompanies’ profits. In fact, one analysis shows that every time gas goes up by a penny, thesecompanies usually pocket another $200 million in quarterly profits. Meanwhile, thesecompanies pay a lower tax rate than most other companies on their investments, partlybecause we’re giving them billions in tax giveaways every year.
  
Now, I want to make clear, we all know that drilling for oil has to be a key part of our overallenergy strategy. We want U.S. oil companies to be doing well. We want them to succeed.That’s why under my administration, we’ve opened up millions of acres of federal lands andwaters to oil and gas production. We’ve quadrupled the number of operating oil rigs to arecord high. We’ve added enough oil and gas pipeline to circle the Earth and then some. Andjust yesterday, we announced the next step for potential new oil and gas exploration in theAtlantic.
So the fact is, we’re producing more oil right now than we have in eight years, and we’reimporting less of it as well. For two years in a row, America has bought less oil from othercountries than we produce here at home -- for the first time in over a decade. 
So American oil is booming. The oil industry is doing just fine. With record profits and risingproduction, I’m not worried about the big oil companies. With high oil prices around the world,they’ve got more than enough incentive to produce even more oil. That’s why I think it’s timethey got by without more help from taxpayers who are already having a tough enough timepaying the bills and filling up their gas tank. And I think it’s curious that some folks inCongress, who are the first to belittle investments in new sources of energy, are the ones thatare fighting the hardest to maintain these giveaways for the oil companies.
Instead of taxpayer giveaways to an industry that’s never been more profitable, we should beusing that money to double-down on investments in clean energy technologies that havenever been more promising -- investments in wind power and solar power and biofuels;investments in fuel-efficient cars and trucks, and energy-efficient homes and buildings. That’sthe future. That’s the only way we're going to break this cycle of high gas prices that happenyear after year after year. As the economy is growing, the only time you start seeing lowergas prices is when the economy is doing badly. That’s not the kind of pattern that we want tobe in. We want the economy doing well, and people to be able to afford their energy costs.
And keep in mind, we can’t just drill our way out of this problem. As I said, oil production herein the United States is doing very well, and it's been doing well even as gas prices are goingup. Well, the reason is because we use more than 20 percent of the world’s oil but we onlyhave 2 percent of the world’s known oil reserves. And that means we could drill every drop ofAmerican oil tomorrow but we’d still have to buy oil from other countries to make up thedifference. We’d still have to depend on other countries to meet our energy needs. Andbecause it’s a world market, the fact that we’re doing more here in the United States doesn’tnecessarily help us because even U.S. oil companies they’re selling that oil on a worldwidemarket. They’re not keeping it just for us. And that means that if there’s rising demandaround the world then the prices are going to up.
That’s not the future that I want for America. I don’t want folks like these back here and thefolks in front of me to have to pay more at the pump every time that there’s some unrest inthe Middle East and oil speculators get nervous about whether there’s going to be enoughsupply. I don’t want our kids to be held hostage to events on the other side of the world. 
  
I want us to control our own destiny. I want us to forge our own future. And that’s why, aslong as I’m President, America is going to pursue an all-of-the-above energy strategy, whichmeans we will continue developing our oil and gas resources in a robust and responsible way.But it also means that we’re going to keep developing more advanced homegrown biofuels,the kinds that are already powering truck fleets across America. 
We’re going to keep investing in clean energy like the wind power and solar power that’salready lighting thousands of homes and creating thousands of jobs. We’re going to keepmanufacturing more cars and trucks to get more miles to the gallon so that you can fill uponce every two weeks instead of every week. We’re going to keep building more homes andbusinesses that waste less energy so that you’re in charge of your own energy bills. 
We’re going to do all of this by harnessing our most inexhaustible resource: Americaningenuity and American imagination. That’s what we need to keep going. That’s what’s atstake right now. That’s the choice that we face. And that’s the choice that’s facing Congresstoday. They can either vote to spend billions of dollars more in oil subsidies that keep ustrapped in the past, or they can vote to end these taxpayer subsidies that aren’t needed toboost oil production so that we can invest in the future. It’s that simple. 
And as long as I’m President, I’m betting on the future. And as the people I’ve talked toaround the country, including the people who are behind me here today, they put their faith inthe future as well. That’s what we do as Americans. That’s who we are. We innovate. Wediscover. We seek new solutions to some of our biggest challenges. And, ultimately, becausewe stick with it, we succeed. And I believe that we’re going to do that again. Today, theAmerican people are going to be watching Congress to see if they have that same faith.
Thank you very much, everybody.
