Good evening. In my first Inaugural Address, I committed this country to the tireless task ofcombating climate change and protecting this planet for future generations. 
Two weeks ago, in Paris, I said before the world that we needed a strong global agreement toaccomplish this goal -- an enduring agreement that reduces global carbon pollution and setsthe world on a course to a low-carbon future. 
A few hours ago, we succeeded.  We came together around the strong agreement the worldneeded.  We met the moment.
I want to commend President Hollande and Secretary General Ban for their leadership and forhosting such a successful summit, and French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius for presidingwith patience and resolve.  And I want to give a special thanks to Secretary John Kerry, mySenior Advisor Brian Deese, our chief negotiator Todd Stern, and everyone on their teams fortheir outstanding work and for making America proud.
I also want to thank the people of nearly 200 nations -- large and small, developed anddeveloping -- for working together to confront a threat to the people of all nations.  Together,we’ve shown what’s possible when the world stands as one.
  
Today, the American people can be proud -- because this historic agreement is a tribute toAmerican leadership.  Over the past seven years, we’ve transformed the United States intothe global leader in fighting climate change.  In 2009, we helped salvage a chaoticCopenhagen Summit and established the principle that all countries had a role to play incombating climate change.
We then led by example, with historic investments in growing industries like wind and solar,creating a new and steady stream of middle-class jobs.  We’ve set the first-ever nationwidestandards to limit the amount of carbon pollution power plants can dump into the air ourchildren breathe.  From Alaska to the Gulf Coast to the Great Plains, we’ve partnered withlocal leaders who are working to help their communities protect themselves from some of themost immediate impacts of a changing climate.   
Now, skeptics said these actions would kill jobs.  Instead, we’ve seen the longest streak ofprivate-sector job creation in our history.  We’ve driven our economic output to all-time highswhile driving our carbon pollution down to its lowest level in nearly two decades.  And then,with our historic joint announcement with China last year, we showed it was possible to bridgethe old divides between developed and developing nations that had stymied global progressfor so long.  That accomplishment encouraged dozens and dozens of other nations to set theirown ambitious climate targets.  And that was the foundation for success in Paris.  Because nonation, not even one as powerful as ours, can solve this challenge alone.  And no country, nomatter how small, can sit on the sidelines.  All of us had to solve it together. 
Now, no agreement is perfect, including this one.  Negotiations that involve nearly 200 nationsare always challenging.  Even if all the initial targets set in Paris are met, we’ll only be part ofthe way there when it comes to reducing carbon from the atmosphere.  So we cannot becomplacent because of today’s agreement.  The problem is not solved because of this accord. But make no mistake, the Paris agreement establishes the enduring framework the worldneeds to solve the climate crisis.  It creates the mechanism, the architecture, for us tocontinually tackle this problem in an effective way.   
This agreement is ambitious, with every nation setting and committing to their own specifictargets, even as we take into account differences among nations.  We’ll have a strong systemof transparency, including periodic reviews and independent assessments, to help hold everycountry accountable for meeting its commitments.  As technology advances, this agreementallows progress to pave the way for even more ambitious targets over time.  And we havesecured a broader commitment to support the most vulnerable countries as they pursuecleaner economic growth.
In short, this agreement will mean less of the carbon pollution that threatens our planet, andmore of the jobs and economic growth driven by low-carbon investment.  Full implementationof this agreement will help delay or avoid some of the worst consequences of climate change,and will pave the way for even more progress, in successive stages, over the coming years.
  
Moreover, this agreement sends a powerful signal that the world is firmly committed to a low-
carbon future.  And that has the potential to unleash investment and innovation in cleanenergy at a scale we have never seen before.  The targets we’ve set are bold.  And byempowering businesses, scientists, engineers, workers, and the private sector -- investors --to work together, this agreement represents the best chance we’ve had to save the one planetthat we’ve got. 
So I believe this moment can be a turning point for the world.  We’ve shown that the worldhas both the will and the ability to take on this challenge.  It won’t be easy.  Progress won’talways come quick.  We cannot be complacent.  While our generation will see some of thebenefits of building a clean energy economy -- jobs created and money saved -- we may notlive to see the full realization of our achievement.  But that’s okay.  What matters is thattoday we can be more confident that this planet is going to be in better shape for the nextgeneration.
And that’s what I care about.  I imagine taking my grandkids, if I’m lucky enough to havesome, to the park someday, and holding their hands, and hearing their laughter, and watchinga quiet sunset, all the while knowing that our work today prevented an alternate future thatcould have been grim; that our work, here and now, gave future generations cleaner air, andcleaner water, and a more sustainable planet.  And what could be more important than that?
Today, thanks to strong, principled, American leadership, that’s the world that we’ll leave toour children -- a world that is safer and more secure, more prosperous, and more free.  Andthat is our most important mission in our short time here on this Earth. 
Thanks.
