This afternoon, I spoke with Governor Malloy and FBI Director Mueller. I offered GovernorMalloy my condolences on behalf of the nation, and made it clear he will have every singleresource that he needs to investigate this heinous crime, care for the victims, counsel theirfamilies.
We’ve endured too many of these tragedies in the past few years. And each time I learn thenews I react not as a President, but as anybody else would -- as a parent.  And that wasespecially true today. I know there’s not a parent in America who doesn’t feel the sameoverwhelming grief that I do.
The majority of those who died today were children -- beautiful little kids between the ages of5 and 10 years old. They had their entire lives ahead of them -- birthdays, graduations,weddings, kids of their own. Among the fallen were also teachers -- men and women whodevoted their lives to helping our children fulfill their dreams.
So our hearts are broken today -- for the parents and grandparents, sisters and brothers ofthese little children, and for the families of the adults who were lost. Our hearts are broken forthe parents of the survivors as well, for as blessed as they are to have their children hometonight, they know that their children’s innocence has been torn away from them too early,and there are no words that will ease their pain.
  
As a country, we have been through this too many times. Whether it’s an elementary schoolin Newtown, or a shopping mall in Oregon, or a temple in Wisconsin, or a movie theater inAurora, or a street corner in Chicago -- these neighborhoods are our neighborhoods, andthese children are our children. And we're going to have to come together and takemeaningful action to prevent more tragedies like this, regardless of the politics.
This evening, Michelle and I will do what I know every parent in America will do, which is hugour children a little tighter and we’ll tell them that we love them, and we’ll remind each otherhow deeply we love one another.  But there are families in Connecticut who cannot do thattonight. And they need all of us right now. In the hard days to come, that community needsus to be at our best as Americans. And I will do everything in my power as President to help.
Because while nothing can fill the space of a lost child or loved one, all of us can extend ahand to those in need -- to remind them that we are there for them, that we are praying forthem, that the love they felt for those they lost endures not just in their memories but also inours.
May God bless the memory of the victims and, in the words of [Scripture], heal thebrokenhearted and bind up their wounds.
