Thank you. Thank you very much. Please be seated.
Thank you so much. Heads of state, Cabinet members, my outstanding Vice President,members of Congress, religious leaders, distinguished guests, Admiral Mullen -- it's good tosee all of you. Let me begin by acknowledging the co-chairs of this breakfast, SenatorsIsakson and Klobuchar, who embody the sense of fellowship at the heart of this gathering.They're two of my favorite senators. Let me also acknowledge the director of my faith-basedoffice, Joshua DuBois, who is here. Where's Joshua? He's out there somewhere. He's doinggreat work.
I want to commend Secretary Hillary Clinton on her outstanding remarks, and her outstandingleadership at the State Department. She's doing good every day. I'm especially pleased to seemy dear friend, Prime Minister Zapatero, and I want him to relay America's greetings to thepeople of Spain. And Johnny, you are right, I'm deeply blessed, and I thank God every day forbeing married to Michelle Obama.
I'm privileged to join you once again, as my predecessors have for over half a century. Likethem, I come here to speak about the ways my faith informs who I am -- as a President, andas a person. But I'm also here for the same reason that all of you are, for we all share arecognition -- one as old as time -- that a willingness to believe, an openness to grace, acommitment to prayer can bring sustenance to our lives.

There is, of course, a need for prayer even in times of joy and peace and prosperity. Perhapsespecially in such times prayer is needed -- to guard against pride and to guard againstcomplacency. But rightly or wrongly, most of us are inclined to seek out the divine not in themoment when the Lord makes His face shine upon us, but in moments when God's grace canseem farthest away.
Last month, God's grace, God's mercy, seemed far away from our neighbors in Haiti. And yet Ibelieve that grace was not absent in the midst of tragedy. It was heard in prayers and hymnsthat broke the silence of an earthquake's wake. It was witnessed among parishioners ofchurches that stood no more, a roadside congregation, holding bibles in their laps. It was feltin the presence of relief workers and medics; translators; servicemen and women, bringingwater and food and aid to the injured.
One such translator was an American of Haitian descent, representative of the extraordinarywork that our men and women in uniform do all around the world -- Navy Corpsman Christian[sic] Brossard. And lying on a gurney aboard the USNS Comfort, a woman asked Christopher: "Where do you come from?  What country?  After my operation," she said, "I will pray for thatcountry." And in Creole, Corpsman Brossard responded, "Etazini." The United States ofAmerica.
God's grace, and the compassion and decency of the American people is expressed throughthe men and women like Corpsman Brossard. It's expressed through the efforts of our ArmedForces, through the efforts of our entire government, through similar efforts from Spain andother countries around the world. It's also, as Secretary Clinton said, expressed throughmultiple faith-based efforts. By evangelicals at World Relief. By the American Jewish WorldService. By Hindu temples, and mainline Protestants, Catholic Relief Services, AfricanAmerican churches, the United Sikhs. By Americans of every faith, and no faith, unitingaround a common purpose, a higher purpose.
It's inspiring. This is what we do, as Americans, in times of trouble. We unite, recognizing thatsuch crises call on all of us to act, recognizing that there but for the grace of God go I,recognizing that life's most sacred responsibility -- one affirmed, as Hillary said, by all of theworld's great religions -- is to sacrifice something of ourselves for a person in need.
Sadly, though, that spirit is too often absent when tackling the long-term, but no lessprofound issues facing our country and the world. Too often, that spirit is missing without thespectacular tragedy, the 9/11 or the Katrina, the earthquake or the tsunami, that can shakeus out of complacency. We become numb to the day-to-day crises, the slow-moving tragediesof children without food and men without shelter and families without health care. We becomeabsorbed with our abstract arguments, our ideological disputes, our contests for power. And inthis Tower of Babel, we lose the sound of God's voice.

Now, for those of us here in Washington, let's acknowledge that democracy has always beenmessy. Let's not be overly nostalgic. Divisions are hardly new in this country. Argumentsabout the proper role of government, the relationship between liberty and equality, ourobligations to our fellow citizens -- these things have been with us since our founding. And I'mprofoundly mindful that a loyal opposition, a vigorous back and forth, a skepticism of power,all of that is what makes our democracy work.
And we've seen actually some improvement in some circumstances. We haven't seen anycanings on the floor of the Senate any time recently. So we shouldn't over-romanticize thepast.  But there is a sense that something is different now; that something is broken; thatthose of us in Washington are not serving the people as well as we should. At times, it seemslike we're unable to listen to one another; to have at once a serious and civil debate. And thiserosion of civility in the public square sows division and distrust among our citizens. It poisonsthe well of public opinion. It leaves each side little room to negotiate with the other. It makespolitics an all-or-nothing sport, where one side is either always right or always wrong when, inreality, neither side has a monopoly on truth. And then we lose sight of the children withoutfood and the men without shelter and the families without health care.
Empowered by faith, consistently, prayerfully, we need to find our way back to civility. Thatbegins with stepping out of our comfort zones in an effort to bridge divisions. We see that inmany conservative pastors who are helping lead the way to fix our broken immigrationsystem.  It's not what would be expected from them, and yet they recognize, in thoseimmigrant families, the face of God. We see that in the evangelical leaders who are rallyingtheir congregations to protect our planet. We see it in the increasing recognition amongprogressives that government can't solve all of our problems, and that talking about valueslike responsible fatherhood and healthy marriage are integral to any anti-poverty agenda.Stretching out of our dogmas, our prescribed roles along the political spectrum, that can helpus regain a sense of civility.
Civility also requires relearning how to disagree without being disagreeable; understanding, asPresident [Kennedy] said, that "civility is not a sign of weakness." Now, I am the first toconfess I am not always right. Michelle will testify to that. But surely you can question mypolicies without questioning my faith, or, for that matter, my citizenship.
Challenging each other's ideas can renew our democracy. But when we challenge each other'smotives, it becomes harder to see what we hold in common. We forget that we share at somedeep level the same dreams -- even when we don't share the same plans on how to fulfillthem.
We may disagree about the best way to reform our health care system, but surely we canagree that no one ought to go broke when they get sick in the richest nation on Earth. We cantake different approaches to ending inequality, but surely we can agree on the need to lift ourchildren out of ignorance; to lift our neighbors from poverty.

We may disagree about gay marriage, but surely we can agree that it is unconscionable totarget gays and lesbians for who they are -- whether it's here in the United States or, asHillary mentioned, more extremely in odious laws that are being proposed most recently inUganda.
Surely we can agree to find common ground when possible, parting ways when necessary. Butin doing so, let us be guided by our faith, and by prayer.  For while prayer can buck us upwhen we are down, keep us calm in a storm; while prayer can stiffen our spines to surmountan obstacle -- and I assure you I'm praying a lot these days -- prayer can also do somethingelse.  It can touch our hearts with humility. It can fill us with a spirit of brotherhood. It canremind us that each of us are children of a awesome and loving God.
Through faith, but not through faith alone, we can unite people to serve the commongood. And that's why my Office of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships has beenworking so hard since I announced it here last year. We've slashed red tape and built effectivepartnerships on a range of uses, from promoting fatherhood here at home to spearheadinginterfaith cooperation abroad. And through that office we've turned the faith-based initiativearound to find common ground among people of all beliefs, allowing them to make an impactin a way that's civil and respectful of difference and focused on what matters most.
It is this spirit of civility that we are called to take up when we leave here today. That's whatI'm praying for.  I know in difficult times like these -- when people are frustrated, whenpundits start shouting and politicians start calling each other names -- it can seem like areturn to civility is not possible, like the very idea is a relic of some bygone era. The worditself seems quaint -- civility.
But let us remember those who came before; those who believed in the brotherhood of maneven when such a faith was tested. Remember Dr. Martin Luther King. Not long after anexplosion ripped through his front porch, his wife and infant daughter inside, he rose to thatpulpit in Montgomery and said, "Love is the only force capable of transforming an enemy intoa friend."
In the eyes of those who denied his humanity, he saw the face of God.
Remember Abraham Lincoln. On the eve of the Civil War, with states seceding and forcesgathering, with a nation divided half slave and half free, he rose to deliver his first Inauguraland said, "We are not enemies, but friends…Though passion may have strained, it must notbreak our bonds of affection."
Even in the eyes of confederate soldiers, he saw the face of God.

Remember William Wilberforce, whose Christian faith led him to seek slavery's abolition inBritain; he was vilified, derided, attacked; but he called for "lessening prejudices [and]conciliating good-will, and thereby making way for the less obstructed progress of truth."
In the eyes of those who sought to silence a nation's conscience, he saw the face of God.
Yes, there are crimes of conscience that call us to action. Yes, there are causes that move ourhearts and offenses that stir our souls. But progress doesn't come when we demonizeopponents.  It's not born in righteous spite. Progress comes when we open our hearts, whenwe extend our hands, when we recognize our common humanity. Progress comes when welook into the eyes of another and see the face of God. That we might do so -- that we will doso all the time, not just some of the time -- is my fervent prayer for our nation and the world.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.