Good morning, everybody.  At midnight last night, for the first time in 17 years, Republicansin Congress chose to shut down the federal government.  Let me be more specific:  Onefaction, of one party, in one house of Congress, in one branch of government, shut downmajor parts of the government -- all because they didn’t like one law. 
This Republican shutdown did not have to happen.  But I want every American to understandwhy it did happen.  Republicans in the House of Representatives refused to fund thegovernment unless we defunded or dismantled the Affordable Care Act.  They’ve shut downthe government over an ideological crusade to deny affordable health insurance to millions ofAmericans.  In other words, they demanded ransom just for doing their job. 
And many representatives, including an increasing number of Republicans, have made it clearthat had they been allowed by Speaker Boehner to take a simple up or down vote on keepingthe government open, with no partisan strings attached, enough votes from both partieswould have kept the American people’s government open and operating.
We may not know the full impact of this Republican shutdown for some time.  It will dependon how long it lasts.  But we do know a couple of things.  We know that the last timeRepublicans shut down the government in 1996, it hurt our economy.  And unlike 1996, oureconomy is still recovering from the worst recession in generations. 
  
We know that certain services and benefits that America’s seniors and veterans and businessowners depend on must be put on hold.  Certain offices, along with every national park andmonument, must be closed.  And while last night, I signed legislation to make sure our 1.4million active-duty military are paid through the shutdown, hundreds of thousands of civilianworkers -- many still on the job, many forced to stay home -- aren’t being paid, even if theyhave families to support and local businesses that rely on them.  And we know that the longerthis shutdown continues, the worse the effects will be.  More families will be hurt.  Morebusinesses will be harmed. 
So, once again, I urge House Republicans to reopen the government, restart the servicesAmericans depend on, and allow the public servants who have been sent home to return towork.  This is only going to happen when Republicans realize they don’t get to hold the entireeconomy hostage over ideological demands.
As I’ve said repeatedly, I am prepared to work with Democrats and Republicans to do thethings we need to do to grow the economy and create jobs, and get our fiscal house in orderover the long run.  Although I should add this shutdown isn’t about deficits, or spending, orbudgets.  After all, our deficits are falling at the fastest pace in 50 years.  We’ve cut them inhalf since I took office.  In fact, many of the demands the Republicans are now making wouldactually raise our deficits.
No, this shutdown is not about deficits, it’s not about budgets.  This shutdown is about rollingback our efforts to provide health insurance to folks who don’t have it.  It’s all about rollingback the Affordable Care Act.  This, more than anything else, seems to be what theRepublican Party stands for these days.  I know it’s strange that one party would makekeeping people uninsured the centerpiece of their agenda, but that apparently is what it is. 
And of course, what’s stranger still is that shutting down our government doesn’t accomplishtheir stated goal.  The Affordable Care Act is a law that passed the House; it passed theSenate.  The Supreme Court ruled it constitutional.  It was a central issue in last year’selection.  It is settled, and it is here to stay.  And because of its funding sources, it’s notimpacted by a government shutdown. 
And these Americans are here with me today because, even though the government is closed,a big part of the Affordable Care Act is now open for business.  And for them, and millions likethem, this is a historic day for a good reason.  It’s been a long time coming, but today,Americans who have been forced to go without insurance can now visit healthcare.gov andenroll in affordable new plans that offer quality coverage.  That starts today. 
And people will have six months to sign up.  So over the next six months, people are going tohave the opportunity -- in many cases, for the first time in their lives -- to get affordablecoverage that they desperately need.
  
Now, of course, if you’re one of the 85 percent of Americans who already have healthinsurance, you don’t need to do a thing. You’re already benefiting from new benefits andprotections that have been in place for some time under this law.  But for the 15 percent ofAmericans who don't have health insurance, this opportunity is life-changing. 
Let me just tell folks a few stories that are represented here today.  A few years ago, AmandaBarrett left her job in New York to take care of her parents.  And for a while, she hadtemporary insurance that covered her multiple sclerosis.  But when it expired, many insurerswouldn’t cover her because of her MS.  And she ended up paying $1,200 a month.  That’snowhere near affordable.  So starting today, she can get covered for much less, becausetoday’s new plan can’t use your medical history to charge you more than anybody else.
Sky-high premiums once forced Nancy Beigel to choose between paying her rent or paying forhealth insurance.  She’s been uninsured ever since.  So she pays all of her medical bills out ofpocket, puts some on her credit card, making them even harder to pay.  Nancy says, “Theytalk about those who fall through the cracks.  I fell through the cracks 10 years ago and I’vebeen stuck there ever since.”  Well, starting today, Nancy can get covered just like everybodyelse.
Trinace Edwards was laid off from her job a year ago today. Six months ago, she wasdiagnosed with a brain tumor.  She couldn’t afford insurance on the individual market, so shehasn’t received treatment yet.  Her daughter Lenace, a student at the University of Maryland,is considering dropping out of school to help pay her mom’s bills.  Well, starting today, thanksto the Affordable Care Act, Trinace can get covered without forcing her daughter to give up onher dreams.
So if these stories of hardworking Americans sound familiar to you, well, starting today, youand your friends and your family and your coworkers can get covered, too.  Just visithealthcare.gov, and there you can compare insurance plans, side by side, the same way you’dshop for a plane ticket on Kayak or a TV on Amazon.  You enter some basic information, you’llbe presented with a list of quality, affordable plans that are available in your area, with cleardescriptions of what each plan covers, and what it will cost.  You’ll find more choices, morecompetition, and in many cases, lower prices -- most uninsured Americans will find that theycan get covered for $100 or less. 
And you don't have to take my word for it.  Go on the website, healthcare.gov, check it out foryourself.  And then show it to your family and your friends and help them get covered, justlike mayors and churches and community groups and companies are already fanning out to doacross the country.
And there’s a hotline where you can apply over the phone and get help with the application, orjust get questions that you have answered by real people, in 150 different languages.   So letme give you that number.  The number is 1-800-318-2596 -- 1-800-318-2596.  Check outhealthcare.gov.  Call that number.  Show your family and friends how to use it.
  
And we can get America covered, once and for all, so that the struggles that these folks havegone through and millions around the country have gone through for years finally getaddressed.
And let me just remind people why I think this is so important.  I heard a striking statisticyesterday -- if you get cancer, you are 70 percent more likely to live another five years if youhave insurance than if you don’t.  Think about that.  That is what it means to have healthinsurance. 
Set aside the issues of security and finances and how you’re impacted by that, the stressinvolved in not knowing whether or not you’re going to have health care.  This is life-or-deathstuff.  Tens of thousands of Americans die each year just because they don’t have healthinsurance.  Millions more live with the fear that they’ll go broke if they get sick.  And today,we begin to free millions of our fellow Americans from that fear. 
Already, millions of young adults have been able to stay on their parents’ plans until they turn26.  Millions of seniors already have gotten a discount on their prescription medicines. Already millions of families have actually received rebates from insurance companies thatdidn’t spend enough on their health care.  So this law means more choice, more competition,lower costs for millions of Americans.
And this law doesn’t just mean economic security for our families.  It means we’re finallyaddressing the biggest drivers of our long-term deficits.  It means a stronger economy. 
Remember most Republicans have made a whole bunch of predictions about this law thathaven’t come true.  There are no “death panels.”  Costs haven’t skyrocketed; they’re growingat the slowest rate in 50 years.  The last three years since I signed the Affordable Care Actinto law are the three slowest rates of health spending growth on record. And contrary to Republican claims, this law hasn’t “destroyed” our economy.  Over the pastthree and a half years, our businesses have created 7.5 million new jobs.  Just today, welearned that our manufacturers are growing at the fastest rate in two and a half years.  Theyhave factored in the Affordable Care Act. They don't think it’s a problem.  What’s weighing onthe economy is not the Affordable Care Act, but the constant series of crises and theunwillingness to pass a reasonable budget by a faction of the Republican Party.
Now, like every new law, every new product rollout, there are going to be some glitches in thesignup process along the way that we will fix.  I’ve been saying this from the start.  Forexample, we found out that there have been times this morning where the site has beenrunning more slowly than it normally will.  The reason is because more than one millionpeople visited healthcare.gov before 7:00 in the morning. 
  
To put that in context, there were five times more users in the marketplace this morning thanhave ever been on Medicare.gov at one time.  That gives you a sense of how important this isto millions of Americans around the country, and that’s a good thing.  And we're going to bespeeding things up in the next few hours to handle all this demand that exceeds anything thatwe had expected. 
Consider that just a couple of weeks ago, Apple rolled out a new mobile operating system. And within days, they found a glitch, so they fixed it.  I don’t remember anybody suggestingApple should stop selling iPhones or iPads -- or threatening to shut down the company if theydidn’t.  That’s not how we do things in America.  We don’t actively root for failure.  We get towork, we make things happen, we make them better, we keep going.
So in that context, I'll work with anybody who’s got a serious idea to make the AffordableCare Act work better.  I've said that repeatedly.  But as long as I am President, I will not givein to reckless demands by some in the Republican Party to deny affordable health insurance tomillions of hardworking Americans. 
I want Republicans in Congress to know these are the Americans you’d hurt if you wereallowed to dismantle this law.  Americans like Amanda, Nancy, and Trinace, who now finallyhave the opportunity for basic security and peace of mind of health care just like everybodyelse -- including members of Congress.  The notion that you’d make a condition for reopeningthe government that I make sure these folks don’t have health care -- that doesn’t make anysense.  It doesn’t make any sense. 
Now, let me make one closing point:  This Republican shutdown threatens our economy at atime when millions of Americans are still looking for work, and businesses are starting to getsome traction.  So the timing is not good.  Of course, a lot of the Republicans in the House ranfor office two years ago promising to shut down the government, and so, apparently, they'venow gotten their wish.  But as I've said before, the irony that the House Republicans have tocontend with is they've shut down a whole bunch of parts of the government, but theAffordable Care Act is still open for business. 
And this may be why you've got many Republican governors and senators and even a growingnumber of reasonable Republican congressmen who are telling the extreme right of their partyto knock it off, pass a budget, move on. 
And I want to underscore the fact that Congress doesn’t just have to end this shutdown andreopen the government -- Congress generally has to stop governing by crisis.  They have tobreak this habit.  It is a drag on the economy.  It is not worthy of this country. 
For example, one of the most important things Congress has to do in the next couple weeks isto raise what's called the debt ceiling.  And it's important to understand what this is.  This is aroutine vote.  Congress has taken this vote 45 times to raise the debt ceiling since RonaldReagan took office.
  
It does not cost taxpayers a single dime.  It does not grow our deficits by a single dime.  Itdoes not authorize anybody to spend any new money whatsoever.  All it does is authorize theTreasury to pay the bills on what Congress has already spent. 
Think about that.  If you buy a car and you’ve got a car note, you do not save money by notpaying your car note.  You’re just a deadbeat.  If you buy a house, you don’t save money bynot authorizing yourself to pay the mortgage.  You’re just going to be foreclosed on yourhome.  That’s what this is about. 
It is routine.  It is what they’re supposed to do.  This is not a concession to me.  It is notsome demand that’s unreasonable that I’m making.  This is what Congress is supposed to doas a routine matter.  And they shouldn’t wait until the last minute to do it.  The last timeRepublicans even threatened this course of action -- many of you remember, back in 2011 --our economy staggered, our credit rating was downgraded for the first time.  If they gothrough with it this time and force the United States to default on its obligations for the firsttime in history, it would be far more dangerous than a government shutdown -- as bad as ashutdown is.  It would be an economic shutdown. 
So I’ll speak more on this in the coming days, but let me repeat:  I will not negotiate overCongress’s responsibility to pay bills it’s already racked up.  I’m not going to allow anybody todrag the good name of the United States of America through the mud just to refight a settledelection or extract ideological demands.  Nobody gets to hurt our economy and millions ofhardworking families over a law you don’t like. 
There are a whole bunch of things that I’d like to see passed through Congress that the HouseRepublicans haven’t passed yet, and I’m not out there saying, well, I’m not -- I’m going to letAmerica default unless Congress does something that they don’t want to do.  That’s not howadults operate.  Certainly that’s not how our government should operate.  And that’s truewhether there’s a Democrat in this office or a Republican in this office.  Doesn’t matterwhether it’s a Democratic House of Representatives or a Republican-controlled House ofRepresentatives -- there are certain rules that everybody abides by because we don’t want tohurt other people just because we have a political disagreement.
So my basic message to Congress is this:  Pass a budget.  End the government shutdown. Pay your bills.  Prevent an economic shutdown.  Don’t wait.  Don’t delay.  Don’t put oureconomy or our people through this any longer. 
I am more than happy to work with them on all kinds of issues.  I want to get back to work onthe things that the American people sent us here to work on -- creating new jobs, newgrowth, new security for our middle class. 
  
We’re better than this.  Certainly the American people are a lot better than this.  And I believethat what we’ve accomplished for Amanda, and Nancy, and Trinace, and tens of millions oftheir fellow citizens- on this day proves that even when the odds are long and the obstaclesare many, we are and always will be a country that can do great things together.
Thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you.  Thank you, all of you, for the great workthat you’re doing.  And thank you, Kathleen Sebelius, for the outstanding work that she’sdoing making sure that millions of Americans can get health insurance.
Thank you.
