Now, let me just comment, first of all, on the fact that I can't get the networks to break in onall kinds of other discussions -- I was just back there listening to Chuck -- he was saying, it’samazing that he’s not going to be talking about national security. I would not have thenetworks breaking in if I was talking about that, Chuck, and you know it.
As many of you have been briefed, we provided additional information today about the site ofmy birth. Now, this issue has been going on for two, two and a half years now. I think itstarted during the campaign. And I have to say that over the last two and a half years I havewatched with bemusement, I've been puzzled at the degree to which this thing just kept ongoing. We've had every official in Hawaii, Democrat and Republican, every news outlet thathas investigated this, confirm that, yes, in fact, I was born in Hawaii, August 4, 1961, inKapiolani Hospital.
We've posted the certification that is given by the state of Hawaii on the Internet foreverybody to see. People have provided affidavits that they, in fact, have seen this birthcertificate. And yet this thing just keeps on going. 
Now, normally I would not comment on something like this, because obviously there’s a lot ofstuff swirling in the press on at any given day and I've got other things to do. But two weeksago, when the Republican House had put forward a budget that will have huge consequencespotentially to the country, and when I gave a speech about my budget and how I felt that weneeded to invest in education and infrastructure and making sure that we had a strong safety 
  
net for our seniors even as we were closing the deficit, during that entire week the dominantnews story wasn’t about these huge, monumental choices that we're going to have to make asa nation. It was about my birth certificate. And that was true on most of the news outlets thatwere represented here.
And so I just want to make a larger point here. We've got some enormous challenges outthere. There are a lot of folks out there who are still looking for work. Everybody is stillsuffering under high gas prices. We're going to have to make a series of very difficultdecisions about how we invest in our future but also get a hold of our deficit and our debt --how do we do that in a balanced way.
And this is going to generate huge and serious debates, important debates. And there aregoing to be some fierce disagreements -- and that’s good. That’s how democracy is supposedto work. And I am confident that the American people and America’s political leaders cancome together in a bipartisan way and solve these problems. We always have. 
But we’re not going to be able to do it if we are distracted. We’re not going to be able to do itif we spend time vilifying each other. We’re not going to be able to do it if we just make stuffup and pretend that facts are not facts. We’re not going to be able to solve our problems if weget distracted by sideshows and carnival barkers.
We live in a serious time right now and we have the potential to deal with the issues that weconfront in a way that will make our kids and our grandkids and our great grandkids proud.And I have every confidence that America in the 21st century is going to be able to come outon top just like we always have. But we’re going to have to get serious to do it. 
I know that there’s going to be a segment of people for which, no matter what we put out,this issue will not be put to rest. But I’m speaking to the vast majority of the Americanpeople, as well as to the press. We do not have time for this kind of silliness. We’ve got betterstuff to do. I’ve got better stuff to do. We’ve got big problems to solve. And I’m confident wecan solve them, but we’re going to have to focus on them -- not on this.
Thanks very much, everybody.
