Good afternoon, everybody.  Yesterday was a historic day.  The comprehensive, long-termdeal that we achieved with our allies and partners to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclearweapon represents a powerful display of American leadership and diplomacy.  It shows whatwe can accomplish when we lead from a position of strength and a position of principle, whenwe unite the international community around a shared vision, and we resolve to solveproblems peacefully.
As I said yesterday, it’s important for the American people and Congress to get a fullopportunity to review this deal.  That process is now underway.  I’ve already reached out toleaders in Congress on both sides of the aisle.  My national security team has begun offeringextensive briefings.  I expect the debate to be robust -- and that’s how it should be.  This isan important issue.  Our national security policies are stronger and more effective when theyare subject to the scrutiny and transparency that democracy demands.
And as I said yesterday, the details of this deal matter very much.  That’s why our teamworked so hard for so long to get the details right.  At the same time, as this debate unfolds, Ihope we don’t lose sight of the larger picture -- the opportunity that this agreementrepresents.  As we go forward, it’s important for everybody to remember the alternative andthe fundamental choice that this moment represents. 
  
With this deal, we cut off every single one of Iran’s pathways to a nuclear program -- anuclear weapons program, and Iran’s nuclear program will be under severe limits for manyyears.  Without a deal, those pathways remain open; there would be no limits on Iran’snuclear program, and Iran could move closer to a nuclear bomb.
With this deal, we gain unprecedented, around-the-clock monitoring of Iran’s key nuclearfacilities and the most comprehensive and intrusive inspection and verification regime evernegotiated.  Without a deal, those inspections go away, and we lose the ability to closelymonitor Iran’s program and detect any covert nuclear weapons program.
With this deal, if Iran violates its commitments, there will be real consequences.  Nuclear-
related sanctions that have helped to cripple the Iranian economy will snap back into place. Without a deal, the international sanctions regime will unravel, with little ability to re-imposethem. 
With this deal, we have the possibility of peacefully resolving a major threat to regional andinternational security.  Without a deal, we risk even more war in the Middle East, and othercountries in the region would feel compelled to pursue their own nuclear programs,threatening a nuclear arms race in the most volatile region in the world.
As I said yesterday, even with this deal, we will continue to have profound differences withIran -- its support for terrorism and its use of proxies to destabilize parts of the Middle East. Therefore, the multilateral arms embargo on Iran will remain in place for an additional fiveyears, and restrictions on ballistic missile technology will remain for eight years.  In addition,the United States will maintain our own sanctions related to Iran’s support for terrorism, itsballistic missile program, and its human rights violations.  And we’ll continue ourunprecedented security cooperation with Israel and continue to deepen our partnerships withthe Gulf States. 
But the bottom line is this:  This nuclear deal meets the national security interests of theUnited States and our allies.  It prevents the most serious threat -- Iran obtaining a nuclearweapon, which would only make the other problems that Iran may cause even worse.  That’swhy this deal makes our country, and the world, safer and more secure.  It’s why thealternative -- no limits on Iran’s nuclear program, no inspections, an Iran that’s closer to anuclear weapon, the risk of a regional nuclear arms race and a greater risk of war -- all thatwould endanger our security.  That’s the choice that we face.  If we don’t choose wisely, Ibelieve future generations will judge us harshly for letting this moment slip away.   
And no one suggests that this deal resolves all the threats that Iran poses to its neighbors orthe world.  Moreover, realizing the promise of this deal will require many years ofimplementation and hard work.  It will require vigilance and execution.  But this deal is ourbest means of assuring that Iran does not get a nuclear weapon.  And, from the start, thathas been my number-one priority, our number-one priority.
  
We’ve got a historic chance to pursue a safer and more secure world -- an opportunity thatmay not come again in our lifetimes.  As President and as Commander-in-Chief, I amdetermined to seize that opportunity. 
So with that, I’m going to take some questions.  And let me see who I’m starting off with. Here you go.  I got it.   
Andrew Beatty, AFP.
 
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Yesterday, you said the deal offered a chance at a newdirection in relations with Iran.  What steps will you take to enable a more moderate Iran? And does this deal allow you to more forcefully counter Iran’s destabilizing actions in theregion quite aside from the nuclear question?  Thank you.
President Obama:  Andrew, if you don’t mind, just because I suspect that there’s going tobe a common set of questions that are touched on -- I promise I will get to your question, butI want to start off just by stepping back and reminding folks of what is at stake here.  And Ialready did in my opening statement, but I just want to reiterate it because I’ve heard alreadysome of the objections to the deal.
The starting premise of our strategy with respect to Iran has been that it would be a gravethreat to the United States and to our allies if they obtained a nuclear weapon.  And soeverything that we’ve done over the last six and a half years has been designed to make surethat we address that number-one priority.  That’s what the sanctions regime was all about. That’s how we were able to mobilize the international community, including some folks thatwe are not particularly close to, to abide by these sanctions.  That’s how these cripplingsanctions came about, was because we were able to gain global consensus that Iran having anuclear weapon would be a problem for everybody.
That’s the reason that Iran’s accounts got frozen and they were not able to get money for theoil sales that they’ve made.  That’s the reason that they had problems operating with respectto international commerce -- because we built that international consensus around this veryspecific, narrow, but profound issue -- the possibility of Iran getting a nuclear weapon.
And, by the way, that was not simply my priority.  If you look back at all the debates thathave taken place over the last five, six years, this has been a Democratic priority, this hasbeen a Republican priority, this has been Prime Minister Netanyahu’s priority.  It’s been ourGulf allies’ priority -- is making sure Iran does not get a nuclear weapon.
  
The deal negotiated by John Kerry, Wendy Sherman, Ernie Moniz, our allies, our partners, theP5+1 achieves that goal.  It achieves our top priority -- making sure that Iran does not get anuclear weapon.  But we have always recognized that even if Iran doesn’t get a nuclearweapon, Iran still poses challenges to our interests and our values, both in the region andaround the world. 
So when this deal gets implemented, we know that we will have dismantled the immediateconcerns around Iran’s nuclear program.  We will have brought their stockpiles down to 98percent.  We will have significantly reduced the number of centrifuges that they operate.  Wewill have installed an unprecedented inspections regime, and that will remain in place not justfor 10 years but, for example, on the stockpiles, will continue to 15 years. 
Iran will have pledged to the international community that it will not develop a nuclearweapon and now will be subject to an Additional Protocol, a more vigorous inspection andmonitoring regime that lasts in perpetuity.  We will have disabled a facility like Arak, the Arakfacility, from allowing Iran to develop plutonium that could be used for a bomb.  We will havegreatly reduced the stockpile of uranium that’s enriched.  And we will have put in placeinspections along the entire supply chain so that if uranium was diverted into a covertprogram we would catch it.
So I can say with confidence but, more importantly, nuclear experts can say with confidencethat Iran will not be in a position to develop a nuclear bomb.  We will have met our number-
one priority. 
Now, we’ll still have problems with Iran’s sponsorship of terrorism; its funding of proxies likeHezbollah that threaten Israel and threaten the region; the destabilizing activities that they'reengaging in, including in places like Yemen.  And my hope is that building on this deal we cancontinue to have conversations with Iran that incentivize them to behave differently in theregion, to be less aggressive, less hostile, more cooperative, to operate the way we expectnations in the international community to behave.  But we're not counting on it.  So this dealis not contingent on Iran changing its behavior.  It’s not contingent on Iran suddenlyoperating like a liberal democracy.
It solves one particular problem, which is making sure they don't have a bomb.  And the pointI’ve repeatedly made -- and is, I believe, hard to dispute -- is that it will be a lot easier for usto check Iran’s nefarious activities, to push back against the other areas where they operatecontrary to our interests or our allies’ interests, if they don't have a bomb.
And so will they change their behavior?  Will we seek to gain more cooperation from them inresolving issues like Syria, or what’s happening in Iraq, to stop encouraging Houthis inYemen?  We’ll continue to engage with them.  Although, keep in mind that unlike the Cubasituation, we're not normalizing diplomatic relations here.  So the contacts will continue to belimited.  But will we try to encourage them to take a more constructive path?  Of course.  Butwe're not betting on it. 
  
And in fact, having resolved the nuclear issue, we will be in a stronger position to work withIsrael, work with the Gulf countries, work with our other partners, work with the Europeans tobring additional pressure to bear on Iran around those issues that remain of concern.
But the argument that I’ve been already hearing -- and this was foreshadowed even beforethe deal was announced -- that because this deal does not solve all those other problems, thatthat's an argument for rejecting this deal, defies logic.  It makes no sense.  And it loses sightof what was our original number-one priority, which is making sure that they don't have abomb.
Jon Karl.
Question:  Mr. President, does it give you any pause to see this deal praised by Syriandictator Assad as a “great victory for Iran,” or praised by those in Tehran who still shout“death to America,” and yet our closest ally in the Middle East calls it “a mistake of historicproportions”?  And here in Congress, it looks like a large majority will vote to reject this deal. I know you can veto that rejection, but do you have any concerns about seeing a majority ofthe people’s representatives in Congress saying that this is a bad deal? 
And if I can just ask you quick political question, a very quick one.
President Obama:  Jon, I think --
Question:  Donald --
President Obama:  Let me answer the question that you asked.  It does not give me pausethat Mr. Assad or others in Tehran may be trying to spin the deal in a way that they think isfavorable to what their constituencies want to hear.  That’s what politicians do.  And that’sbeen the case throughout.  I mean, you’ll recall that during the course of these negotiationsover the last couple of months every time the Supreme Leader or somebody tweetedsomething out, for some reason we all bought into the notion, well, the Obama administrationmust be giving this or capitulating to that.  Well, now we have a document so you can seewhat the deal is.
We don’t have to speculate, we don’t have to engage in spin, you can just read what it saysand what is required.  And nobody has disputed that as a consequence of this agreement Iranhas to drastically reduce its stockpiles of uranium, is cut off from plutonium; the Fordowfacility that is underground is converted; that we have an unprecedented inspections regime;that we have snap-back provisions if they cheat.  The facts are the facts.  And I'm notconcerned about what others say about it. 
  
Now, with respect to Congress, my hope -- I won’t prejudge this -- my hope is, is thateveryone in Congress also evaluates this agreement based on the facts -- not on politics, noton posturing, not on the fact that this is a deal I bring to Congress as opposed to a RepublicanPresident, not based on lobbying, but based on what’s in the national interest of the UnitedStates of America. 
And I think that if Congress does that, then, in fact, based on the facts, the majority ofCongress should approve of this deal.  But we live in Washington and politics do intrude.  Andas I said in an interview yesterday, I am not betting on the Republican Party rallying behindthis agreement.  I do expect the debate to be based on facts and not speculation ormisinformation.  And that I welcome -- in part because, look, there are legitimate realconcerns here.  We’ve already talked about it.  We have huge differences with Iran.  Israelhas legitimate concerns about its security relative to Iran.  You have a large country with asignificant military that has proclaimed that Israel shouldn’t exist, that has denied theHolocaust, that has financed Hezbollah, and as a consequence there are missiles that arepointed towards Tel Aviv. 
And so I think there are very good reasons why Israelis are nervous about Iran’s position inthe world generally.  And I’ve said this to Prime Minister Netanyahu, I’ve said it directly to theIsraeli people.  But what I’ve also said is that all those threats are compounded if Iran gets anuclear weapon.  And for all the objections of Prime Minister Netanyahu, or, for that matter,some of the Republican leadership that’s already spoken, none of them have presented to me,or the American people, a better alternative. 
I'm hearing a lot of talking points being repeated about “this is a bad deal” -- “this is ahistorically bad deal,” “this will threaten Israel and threaten the world and threaten the UnitedStates.”  I mean, there’s been a lot of that. 
What I haven’t heard is, what is your preferred alternative?  If 99 percent of the worldcommunity and the majority of nuclear experts look at this thing and they say, this willprevent Iran from getting a nuclear bomb, and you are arguing either that it does not, or thateven if it does it’s temporary, or that because they’re going to get a windfall of their accountsbeing unfrozen that they’ll cause more problems, then you should have some alternative topresent.  And I haven’t heard that.  And the reason is because there really are only twoalternatives here:  Either the issue of Iran obtaining a nuclear weapon is resolveddiplomatically through a negotiation, or it’s resolved through force, through war.  Those arethe options.
Now, you’ll hear some critics say, well, we could have negotiated a better deal.  Okay.  Whatdoes that mean?  I think the suggestion among a lot of the critics has been that a better deal,an acceptable deal would be one in which Iran has no nuclear capacity at all, peaceful orotherwise.
  
The problem with that position is that there is nobody who thinks that Iran would or couldever accept that, and the international community does not take the view that Iran can’t havea peaceful nuclear program.  They agree with us that Iran cannot have a nuclear weapon.
And so we don’t have diplomatic leverage to eliminate every vestige of a peaceful nuclearprogram in Iran.  What we do have the leverage to do is to make sure they don’t have aweapon.  That’s exactly what we’ve done.
So to go back to Congress, I challenge those who are objecting to this agreement, numberone, to read the agreement before they comment on it; number two, to explain specificallywhere it is that they think this agreement does not prevent Iran from getting a nuclearweapon, and why they’re right and people like Ernie Moniz, who is an MIT nuclear physicistand an expert in these issues, is wrong, why the rest of the world is wrong, and then presentan alternative.
And if the alternative is that we should bring Iran to heel through military force, then thosecritics should say so.  And that will be an honest debate. 
All right.
Question:  Mr. President, if I can --
President Obama:  No, no --
Question:  Prime Minister Netanyahu said that you have a situation where Iran can delay 24days before giving access to military facilities --
President Obama:  I’m happy to -- that’s a good example.  So let’s take the issue of 24days.  This has been I think swirling today, the notion that this is insufficient in terms ofinspections.
Now, keep in mind, first of all, that we’ll have 24/7 inspections of declared nuclear facilities --Fordow, Natanz, Arak, their uranium mines; facilities that are known to produce centrifuges,parts.  That entire infrastructure that we know about we will have sophisticated, 24/7monitoring of those facilities. 
So then the issue is, what if they try to develop a covert program?  Now, one of theadvantages of having inspections across the entire production chain is that it makes it verydifficult to set up a covert program.  There are only so many uranium mines in Iran.  And if, infact, we’re counting the amount of uranium that’s being mined and suddenly some is missingon the back end, they got some explaining to do.
  
So we’re able to track what’s happening along the existing facilities to make sure that there isnot diversion into a covert program.  But let’s say that Iran is so determined that it now wantsto operate covertly.  The IAEA, the international organization charged with implementing thenon-proliferation treaty and monitoring nuclear activities in countries around the world -- theIAEA will have the ability to say, that undeclared site we’re concerned about, we seesomething suspicious.  And they will be able to say to Iran, we want to go inspect that. 
Now, if Iran objects, we can override it.  In the agreement, we’ve set it up so we can overrideIran’s objection.  And we don’t need Russia or China in order for us to get that override.  Andif they continue to object, we’re in a position to snap back sanctions and declare that Iran is inviolation and is cheating. 
As for the fact that it may take 24 days to finally get access to the site, the nature of nuclearprograms and facilities is such, this is not something you hide in a closet.  This is notsomething you put on a dolly and kind of wheel off somewhere.  And, by the way, if weidentify an undeclared site that we’re suspicious about, we’re going to be keeping eyes on it. So we’re going to be monitoring what the activity is, and that’s going to be something that willbe evidence if we think that some funny business was going on there that we can thenpresent to the international community.
So we’ll be monitoring that that entire time.  And, by the way, if there is nuclear material onthat site, high school physics will remind us that that leaves a trace.  And so we’ll know that,in fact, there was a violation of the agreement. 
So the point is, Jonathan, that this is the most vigorous inspection and verification regime byfar that has ever been negotiated.  Is it possible that Iran decides to try to cheat despitehaving this entire inspection verification mechanism?  It’s possible.  But if it does, first of all,we’ve built in a one-year breakout time, which gives us a year to respond forcefully.  Andwe’ve built in a snap-back provision so we don't have to go through lengthy negotiations atthe U.N. to put the sanctions right back in place. 
And so really the only argument you can make against the verification and inspectionmechanism that we’ve put forward is that Iran is so intent on obtaining a nuclear weapon thatno inspection regime and no verification mechanism would be sufficient because they’d findsome way to get around it because they're untrustworthy.
And if that's your view, then we go back to the choice that you have to make earlier.  Thatmeans, presumably, that you can't negotiate.  And what you're really saying is, is that you'vegot to apply military force to guarantee that they don't have a nuclear program.  And ifsomebody wants to make that debate -- whether it’s the Republican leadership, or PrimeMinister Netanyahu, or the Israeli Ambassador or others, they're free to make it.  But it’s notpersuasive.
  
Carol Lee.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I want to ask you about the arms and ballistic missileembargo.  Why did you decide -- agree to lift those even with the five- and eight-yeardurations?  It’s obviously emerging as a sticking point on the Hill.  And are you concerned thatarms to Iran will go to Hezbollah or Hamas?  And is there anything that you or a futurePresident can do to stop that?
And if you don't mind, I wanted to see if you could step back a little bit, and when you look atthis Iran deal and all the other issues and unrest that's happening in the Middle East, whatkind of Middle East do you want to leave when you leave the White House in a year and ahalf?
President Obama:  So the issue of the arms embargo and ballistic missiles is of real concernto us -- has been of real concern to us.  And it is in the national security interest of the UnitedStates to prevent Iran from sending weapons to Hezbollah, for example, or sending weaponsto the Houthis in Yemen that accelerate a civil war there. 
We have a number of mechanisms under international law that give us authority to interdictarms shipments by Iran.  One of those mechanisms is the U.N. security resolution related toIran’s nuclear program.  Essentially, Iran was sanctioned because of what had happened atFordow, its unwillingness to comply with previous U.N. security resolutions about their nuclearprogram.  And as part of the package of sanctions that was slapped on them, the issue ofarms and ballistic missiles were included.
Now, under the terms of the original U.N. resolution, the fact is that once an agreement wasarrived at that gave the international community assurance Iran didn't have a nuclearweapon, you could argue just looking at the text that those arms and ballistic missileprohibitions should immediately go away. 
But what I said to our negotiators was given that Iran has breached trust, and the uncertaintyof our allies in the region about Iran’s activities, let’s press for a longer extension of the armsembargo and the ballistic missile prohibitions.  And we got that.  We got five years in which,under this new agreement, arms coming in and out of Iran are prohibited.  And we got eightyears with respect to ballistic missiles. 
But part of the reason why we were willing to extend it only for five, let’s say, as opposed to alonger period of time, is because we have other U.N. resolutions that prohibit arms sales byIran to organizations like Hezbollah.  We have other U.N. resolutions and multilateralagreements that give us authority to interdict arms shipments from Iran throughout theregion.  And so we’ve had belts and suspenders and buttons, a whole bunch of different legalauthorities.  These legal authorities under the nuclear program may lapse after five or eightyears, but we’ll still be in possession of other legal authorities that allow us to interdict thosearms.
  
And truthfully, these prohibitions are not self-enforcing.  It’s not like the U.N. has the capacityto police what Iran is doing. 
What it does is it gives us authority under international law to prevent arms shipments fromhappening in concert with our allies and our partners.  And the real problem, if you look athow, for example, Hezbollah got a lot of missiles that are a grave threat to Israel and many ofour friends in the region, it’s not because they were legal.  It’s not because somehow that wasauthorized under international law.  It was because there was insufficient intelligence, orcapacity, to stop those shipments.
So the bottom line is, Carol, I share the concerns of Israel, Saudis, Gulf partners about Iranshipping arms and causing conflict and chaos in the region.  And that’s why I’ve said to them,let’s double down and partner much more effectively to improve our intelligence capacity andour interdiction capacity so that fewer of those arms shipments are getting through the net.
But the legal authorities, we’ll still possess.  And obviously, we’ve got our own unilateralprohibitions and sanctions in place around non-nuclear issues, like support for Hezbollah.  Andthose remain in place.
Now, in terms of the larger issues of the Middle East, obviously that’s a longer discussion.  Ithink my key goal when I turn over the keys to the President -- the next President -- is thatwe are on track to defeat ISIL; that they are much more contained and we’re moving in theright direction there.  That we have jumpstarted a process to resolve the civil war in Syria,which is like an open sore in the region and is giving refuge to terrorist organizations who aretaking advantage of that chaos.  To make sure that in Iraq not only have we pushed backISIL, but we’ve also created an environment in which Sunni, Shia and Kurd are starting tooperate and function more effectively together.  And to be in a conversation with all ourpartners in the region about how we have strengthened our security partnerships so that theyfeel they can address any potential threats that may come, including threats from Iran.  Andthat includes providing additional security assurances and cooperation to Israel, building onthe unprecedented cooperation that we have already put in place and support that we’vealready put in place.  It includes the work that we’ve done with the GCC up at Camp David,making sure that we execute that.
If we’ve done those things, then the problems in the Middle East will not be solved.  Andultimately, it’s not the job of the President of the United States to solve every problem in theMiddle East.  The people of the Middle East are going to have to solve some of these problemsthemselves.  But I think we can provide that next President at least a foundation for continuedprogress in these various areas.
The last thing I would say -- and this is a longer-term issue -- is we have to address the youthin the region with jobs and opportunity and a better vision for the future so that they are nottempted by the nihilistic, violent dead-end that organizations like ISIL offer.
  
Again, we can’t do that entirely by ourselves, but we can partner with well-intentionedorganizations, states, NGOs, religious leaders in the region.  We have to do a better job ofthat than we’ve been doing so far.
Michael Crowley.
Question:   Thank you.  You alluded earlier to Iran’s role in Syria, just to focus on that for amoment.  Many analysts and some former members of your administration believe that thekind of negotiated political settlement that you say is necessary in Syria will require workingdirectly with Iran and giving Iran an important role.  Do you agree?  And is that a dialogueyou’ll be actively seeking? 
And what about the fight against ISIS?  What would it take for there to be explicit cooperationbetween the U.S. and Iran?
President Obama:  I do agree that we’re not going to solve the problems in Syria unlessthere’s buy-in from the Russians, the Iranians, the Turks, our Gulf partners.  It’s too chaotic. There are too many factions.  There’s too much money and too many arms flooding into thezone.  It’s gotten caught up in both sectarian conflict and geopolitical jockeying.  And in orderfor us to resolve it, there’s going to have to be agreement among the major powers that areinterested in Syria that this is not going to be won on the battlefield.  So Iran is one of thoseplayers, and I think that it’s important for them to be part of that conversation. 
I want to repeat what I said earlier.  We have not -- and I don’t anticipate any time in thenear future -- restored normal diplomatic relations with Iran.  And so I do not foresee a formalset of agreements with Iran in terms of how we’re conducting our counter-ISIL campaign. 
But clearly, Iran has influence in Iraq.  Iraq has a majority Shia population.  They haverelationships to Iran.  Some are natural.  We expect somebody like Prime Minister Abadi tomeet with and negotiate and work with Iran as its neighbor.  Some are less legitimate, whereyou see Iran financing Shia militias that in the past have killed American soldiers and in thefuture may carry out atrocities when they move into Sunni areas. 
And so we’re working with our diplomats on the ground, as well as our military teams on theground to asses where can we appropriately at least de-conflict, and where can we work withPrime Minister Abadi around an overall strategy for Iraq to regain its sovereignty, and wheredo we tell Abadi, you know what, what Iran is doing there is a problem, and we can’tcooperate in that area, for example, unless you get those folks out of there because we’re notgoing to have our troops, even in an advisory or training role, looking over their shouldersbecause they’re not sure of what might happen to them.  And those conversations have beenongoing.  I think they will continue. 
  
The one thing you can count on is that any work that the U.S. government does, or the U.S.military does in Iraq with other partners on the ground is premised on the idea that they arereporting to -- under the chain of command of the Iraqi government and Iraqi security forces. If we don’t have confidence that ultimately Abadi is directing those soldiers, then it’s tough forus to have any kind of direct relationship.
Major Garrett.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  As you well know, there are four Americans in Iran --three held on trumped-up charges, according to your administration; one, whereaboutsunknown.  Can you tell the country, sir, why you are content, with all the fanfare around thisdeal, to leave the conscience of this nation and the strength of this nation unaccounted for inrelation to these four Americans?
And last week, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said, under no circumstances shouldthere be any relief for Iran in terms of ballistic missiles or conventional weapons.  It isperceived that that was a last-minute capitulation in these negotiations.  Many in thePentagon feel you’ve left the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff hung out to dry.  Could youcomment?
President Obama:  I got to give you credit, Major, for how you craft those questions.  Thenotion that I am content as I celebrate with American citizens languishing in Iranian jails --Major, that’s nonsense, and you should know better.
I’ve met with the families of some of those folks.  Nobody is content.  And our diplomats andour teams are working diligently to try to get them out. 
Now, if the question is why we did not tie the negotiations to their release, think about thelogic that that creates.  Suddenly, Iran realizes, you know what, maybe we can get additionalconcessions out of the Americans by holding these individuals.  It makes it much more difficultfor us to walk away if Iran somehow thinks that a nuclear deal is dependent in some fashionon the nuclear deal.  And, by the way, if we had walked away from the nuclear deal, we’d stillbe pushing them just as hard to get these folks out.  That’s why those issues are notconnected.  But we are working every single day to try to get them out, and won’t stop untilthey’re out and rejoined with their families.
With respect to the Chairman’s testimony, to some degree I already answered this with Carol. We are not taking the pressure off Iran with respect to arms and with respect to ballisticmissiles.  As I just explained, not only do we keep in place for five years the arms embargounder this particular new U.N. resolution, not only do we maintain the eight years on theballistic missiles under this particular U.N. resolution, but we have a host of other multilateraland unilateral authorities that allow us to take action where we see Iran engaged in thoseactivities whether it’s six years from now or 10 years from now.
  
So we have not lost those legal authorities.  And in fact, part of my pitch to the GCCcountries, as well as to Prime Minister Netanyahu, is we should do a better job making surethat Iran is not engaged in sending arms to organizations like Hezbollah.  And as I justindicated, that means improving our intelligence capacity and our interdiction capacity withour partners.
April Ryan.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I want to change the subject a bit.  Earlier this year,on the flight to Selma, you said, on matters of race, as President your job is to close theremaining gaps that are left in state and federal government.  Now, how does criminal justicereform fit into that equation?  And what gaps remain for you towards the end of yourpresidency?  And also, what does it mean to travel to Kenya, your father’s homeland, in thenext couple of weeks as President to the United States?  And lastly, would you revoke theMedal of Freedom from Bill Cosby?
President Obama:  You stuffed a lot in there, April.  
Question:  I learned from my colleagues. 
President Obama:  Say, who did you learn from?  Jonathan Karl?  Is that what you said?
Question:   On criminal justice reform, obviously I gave a lengthy speech yesterday, but thisis something that I’ve been thinking about a lot; been working first with Eric Holder, now withLoretta Lynch about -- we’ve been working on along with other prosecutors of the U.S.Attorney’s Office.  It’s an outgrowth of the task force that we put together, post-Ferguson andthe Garner case in New York.
And I don’t think that the criminal justice system is obviously the sole source of racial tensionin this country, or the key institution to resolving the opportunity gap.  But I think it is a partof the broader set of challenges that we face in creating a more perfect union. 
And the good news is, is that this is one of those rare issues where we’ve got someRepublican and Democratic interest, as well as federal, state, and local interest in solving theproblem.  I think people recognize that there are violent criminals out there and they’ve got tobe locked up.  We’ve got to have tough prosecutors, we have to support our law enforcementofficials.  Police are in a tough job and they are helping to keep us safe, and we are gratefuland thankful to them.
But what we also know is this huge spike in incarcerations is also driven by non-violent drugoffenses where the sentencing is completely out of proportion with the crime.  And that coststaxpayers enormous amounts of money.
  
It is debilitating communities who are seeing huge proportions of the young men in theircommunities finding themselves with a criminal record, rendering them oftentimesunemployable.  So it compounds problems that these communities already have. 
And so I am very appreciative of folks like Dick Durbin and Cory Booker, alongside Mike Leeand Rand Paul and other folks in the House who are working together to see if we can bothreduce some of these mandatory minimums around non-violent drug offenses.  Becauseagain, I tend not to have a lot of sympathy when it comes to violent crime.  But when itcomes to non-violent drug offenses, is there work that we can do to reduce mandatoryminimums, create more diversion programs like drug courts?  Then, can we do a better job onthe rehabilitation side inside of prisons so that we are preparing these folks who areeventually going to be released to reenter the workforce?  On the back end, are we doingmore to link them up with reentry programs that are effective? 
And this may be an area where we could have some really significant bipartisan legislationthat doesn't eliminate all the other challenges we’ve got.  Because the most important goal iskeeping folks from getting in the criminal justice system in the first place, which means earlychildhood education and good jobs, and making sure that we're not segregating folks inimpoverished communities that have no contact with opportunity.
But this can make a difference.  I met these four ex-offenders, as I said, yesterday, and whatwas remarkable was how they had turned their lives around.  And these were some folks whohad been some pretty tough criminals.  One of them had served 10 years; another was arepeat offender that had served a lot of time.  And in each instance, somebody intervened atsome point in their lives -- once they had already been in the criminal justice system, oncethey had already gotten in trouble -- and said, you know what, I think you can live a differentway, and I’m willing to help you. 
And that one person, an art teacher, or a GED teacher, or somebody who was willing to offera guy a job -- I want to give a shout-out to Five Guys, because one of the guys there was anex-felon, and Five Guys gave him a job.  And he ended up becoming a manager at the storeand was able to completely turn his life around.  But the point was, somebody reached out tothat person and gave him a chance. 
And so part of our question should be, how about somebody reaching out to these guys whenthey’re 10, or 11, or 12, or eight, as opposed to waiting until they’ve already gone through acriminal justice program.  That’s part of why we’re doing My Brother’s Keeper.  But this is anarea where I feel modestly optimistic. 
I think in the meantime we’ve got to stay on top of keeping the crime rate down, because partof the reason I think there’s a conversation taking place is violent crime has significantlydropped.  Last year, we saw both incarcerations and the crime rate drop, and this can alwaysturn if we start seeing renewed problems in terms of violent crime.
  
And there’s parts of the country where violent crime is still a real problem, including myhometown of Chicago, and in Baltimore.
And part of what I’ve asked Attorney General Lynch to do is to figure out how can we refocusattention.  If we’re going to do a package of criminal justice reforms, part of it would beactually having a greater police presence and more law enforcement in the communities thatare really getting hit hard and haven’t seen some of the drops in violent crime that we’ve seenin places like Manhattan, for example.
With respect to the visit to Kenya, it’s obviously something I’m looking forward to.  I’ll behonest with you, visiting Kenya as a private citizen is probably more meaningful to me thanvisiting as President because I can actually get outside of a hotel room or a conferencecenter.  And just the logistics of visiting a place are always tough as President, but it’sobviously symbolically important.  And my hope is, is that we can deliver a message that theU.S. is a strong partner not just for Kenya, but for Sub-Saharan Africa generally; build on theprogress that’s been made around issues of health and education; focus on counterterrorismissues that are important in East Africa because of al-Shabaab and some of the tragedies thathave happened inside of Kenya; and continue to encourage democracy and the reduction ofcorruption inside that country that sometimes has held back this incredibly gifted and blessedcountry.
And with respect to the Medal of Freedom, there’s no precedent for revoking a medal.  Wedon’t have that mechanism.  And as you know, I tend to make it a policy not to comment onthe specifics of cases where there might still be, if not criminal, then civil issues involved.
I’ll say this:  If you give a woman -- or a man, for that matter -- without his or herknowledge, a drug, and then have sex with that person without consent, that’s rape.  And Ithink this country -- any civilized country -- should have no tolerance for rape. 
All right.  Have we exhausted Iran questions here?  I think there’s a helicopter that’s coming. But I really am enjoying this Iran debate.  Topics that may not have been touched upon,criticisms that you’ve heard that I did not answer?  Go ahead.  I know Josh is getting a littlestressed here -- but I just want to make sure that we’re not leaving any stones unturnedhere.  Go ahead.
Question:   Thanks, Mr. President.  I’ll be brief.  The argument has been made that Iran nowhas a cash windfall, billions to spend.  Your people seem confident they’re going to spend it athome.  Why are you confident they’re not going to spend it on arming Hezbollah, armingBashar al-Assad, et cetera?
President Obama:  I think that’s a great question and I’m glad you brought it up.  I think itis a mistake to characterize our belief that they will just spend it on daycare centers, androads, and paying down debt.
  
We think that they have to do some of that, because Rouhani was elected specifically on thepremise of improving the economic situation inside of Iran.  That economy has tanked sincewe imposed sanctions.
So the notion that they're just immediately going to turn over $100 billion to the IRGC or theQuds Force I think runs contrary to all the intelligence that we’ve seen and the commitmentsthat the Iranian government has made.
Do we think that with the sanctions coming down, that Iran will have some additionalresources for its military and for some of the activities in the region that are a threat to us anda threat to our allies?  I think that is a likelihood that they’ve got some additional resources. Do I think it’s a game-changer for them?  No.
They are currently supporting Hezbollah, and there is a ceiling -- a pace at which they couldsupport Hezbollah even more, particularly in the chaos that's taking place in Syria.  So canthey potentially try to get more assistance there?  Yes.  Should we put more resources intoblocking them from getting that assistance to Hezbollah?  Yes.  Is the incremental additionalmoney that they’ve got to try to destabilize the region or send to their proxies, is that moreimportant than preventing Iran from getting a nuclear weapon?  No.  So I think -- again, thisis a matter of us making a determination of what is our priority.
The other problem with the argument that folks have been making about, oh, this is a windfalland suddenly Iran is flushed with cash, and they're going to take over the world.  And I saythat not tongue-in-cheek, because if you look at some of the statements by some of ourcritics, you would think that Iran is, in fact, going to take over the world as a consequence ofthis deal -- which I think would be news to the Iranians.
That argument is also premised on the notion that if there is no deal, if Congress votes downthis deal, that we're able to keep sanctions in place with the same vigor and effectiveness aswe have right now.  And that, I can promise you, is not true.  That is absolutely not true.  Iwant to repeat:  We're not writing Iran a check.  This is Iran’s money that we were able toblock from them having access to.  That required the cooperation of countries all around theworld, many of whom really want to purchase oil from Iran.  The imposition of sanctions --their cooperation with us -- has cost them billions of dollars, made it harder for them. They’ve been willing to do that because they’ve believed we were sincere about trying toresolve the nuclear issue peacefully, and they considered that a priority -- a high enoughpriority that they were willing to cooperate with us on sanctions. 
If they saw us walking away, or more specifically, if they saw the U.S. Congress effectivelyvetoing the judgment of 99 percent of the world community that this is a deal that resolvesthe Iranian weapons program -- nuclear weapons program in an equitable way, the sanctionssystem unravels.  And so we could still maintain some of our unilateral sanctions, but it wouldbe far less effective -- as it was before we were able to put together these multilateralsanctions.
  
So maybe they don't get $100 billion; maybe they get $60 billion or $70 billion instead.  Theprice for that that we’ve paid is that now Iran is pursuing a nuclear weapon.  We have noinspectors on the ground.  We don't know what’s going on.  They’re still getting some cashwindfall.  We’ve lost credibility in the eyes of the world.  We will have effectively united Iranand divided ourselves from our allies.  A terrible position to be in. 
I'm just going to look -- I made some notes about any of the arguments -- the otherarguments that I’ve heard here. 
Question:   What about -- [off-mic] -- the end of the deal? 
President Obama:  Okay, yes, that’s a good one.  The notion --
Question:   At the end of the deal they could go back --
President Obama:  Right.  Well, so let’s address this issue of -- because that’s the other bigargument that’s been made.  All right, let’s assume that the deal holds for 10 years, Irandoesn’t cheat.  Now, at the end of 10 years, some of the restrictions have been lifted --although, remember, others stay in place for 15 years.  So for example, they’ve still got tokeep their stockpiles at a minimal level for 15 years.  The inspections don’t go away; thoseare still in place 15, 20 years from now.  Their commitment under the Non-Proliferation Treatydoes not go away; that’s still in place.  The additional protocol that they have to sign up forunder this deal, which requires a more extensive inspection and verification mechanism -- thatstays in place.
So there’s no scenario in which a U.S. President is not in a stronger position 12, 13, 15 yearsfrom now if, in fact, Iran decided at that point they still wanted to get a nuclear weapon. Keep in mind, we will have maintained a one-year breakout time, we will have rolled backtheir program, frozen their facilities, kept them under severe restrictions, had observers. They will have made international commitments supported by countries around the world. 
And -- hold on a second -- and if at that point they finally decided, you know what, we’regoing to cheat, or not even cheat -- at that point, they decide openly we’re now pursuing anuclear weapon -- they’re still in violation of this deal and the commitments they’ve madeinternationally. 
And so we are still in a position to mobilize the world community to say, no, you can’t have anuclear weapon.  And they’re not in a stronger position to get a nuclear weapon at that point;they’re in a weaker position than they are today.  And, by the way, we haven’t given awayany of our military capabilities.  We’re not in a weaker position to respond. 
  
So even if everything the critics were saying was true -- that at the end of 10 years, or 12years, or 15 years, Iran now is in a position to decide it wants a nuclear weapon, that they’reat a breakout point -- they won’t be at a breakout point that is more dangerous than thebreakout point they’re in right now.  They won’t be at a breakout point that is shorter than theone that exists today.  And so why wouldn’t we at least make sure that for the next 10, 15,years they are not getting a nuclear weapon and we can verify it; and afterwards, if theydecide if they’ve changed their mind, we are then much more knowledgeable about what theircapabilities are, much more knowledgeable about what their program is, and still in a positionto take whatever actions we would take today?
Question:  So none of this is holding out hope that they’ll change their behavior?
President Obama:  No.
Question:  Nothing different --
President Obama:  No.  Look, I'm always hopeful that behavior may change for the sake ofthe Iranian people as well as people in the region.  There are young people there who are notgetting the opportunities they deserve because of conflict, because of sectarianism, becauseof poor governance, because of repression, because of terrorism.  And I remain eternallyhopeful that we can do something about that, and it should be part of U.S. foreign policy to dosomething about that.  But I'm not banking on that to say that this deal is the right thing todo.
Again, it is incumbent on the critics of this deal to explain how an American President is in aworse position 12, 13, 14, 15 years from now if, in fact, at that point Iran says we’re going topull out of the NPT, kick out inspectors and go for a nuclear bomb.  If that happens, thatPresident will be in a better position than what happened if Iran, as a consequence ofCongress rejecting this deal, decides that’s it, we’re done negotiating, we’re going after abomb right now. 
The choices would be tougher today than they would be for that President 15 years fromnow.  And I have not yet heard logic that refutes that.
All right.  I really have to go now.  I think we’ve hit the big themes.  But I promise you, I willaddress this again.  All right?  I suspect this is not the last that we’ve heard of this debate.
