Thank you! Hello VFW! Thank you so much. Please, please, everybody have a seat.
Commander DeNoyer, thank you for your introduction, and your service in Vietnam and onbehalf of America's veterans. I want to thank your executive director, Bob Wallace; your nextcommander, who I look forward to working with, John Hamilton.  And to Gwen Rankin, LeanneLemley, and the entire Ladies Auxiliary, thank you for your patriotic service to America.
I stand before you as our hearts still ache over the tragedy in Aurora, Colorado.  Yesterday Iwas in Aurora, with families whose loss is hard to imagine -- with the wounded, who arefighting to recover; with a community and a military base in the midst of their grief. And theytold me of the loved ones they lost. And here today, it's fitting to recall those who wore ournation's uniform:
Staff Sergeant Jesse Childress -- an Air Force reservist, 29 years old, a cyber specialist wholoved sports, the kind of guy, said a friend, who'd help anybody.
Petty Officer Third Class John Larimer -- 27 years old, who, like his father and grandfatherbefore him, joined the Navy, and who is remembered as an outstanding shipmate.
  
Rebecca Wingo -- 32 years old, a veteran of the Air Force, fluent in Chinese, who served as atranslator; a mother, whose life will be an inspiration to her two little girls.
And Jonathan Blunk -- from Reno, just 26 years old, but a veteran of three Navy tours, whosefamily and friends will always know that in that theater he gave his own life to save another.
These young patriots were willing to serve in faraway lands, yet they were taken from us hereat home.  And yesterday I conveyed to their families a message on behalf of all Americans:We honor your loved ones. We salute their service. And as you summon the strength to carryon and keep bright their legacy, we stand with you as one united American family.
Veterans of Foreign Wars, in you I see the same shining values, the virtues that makeAmerica great. When our harbor was bombed and fascism was on the march, when thefighting raged in Korea and Vietnam, when our country was attacked on that clear Septembermorning, when our forces were sent to Iraq -- you answered your country’s call. Because youknow what Americans must always remember -- our nation only endures because there arepatriots who protect it.
In the crucible of battle, you were tested in ways the rest of us will never know. You carry inyour hearts the memory of the comrades you lost.  For you understand that we must honorour fallen heroes not just on Memorial Day, but all days. And when an American goes missing,or is taken prisoner, we must do everything in our power to bring them home.
Even after you took off the uniform, you never stopped serving. You took care of each other --fighting for the benefits and care you had earned. And you’ve taken care of the generationsthat followed, including our newest veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan. On behalf of all ourmen and women in uniform, and on behalf of the American people, I want to thank you,VFW. Thank you for your outstanding work.
Of course, some among you -- our Vietnam veterans -- didn’t always receive that thanks, atleast not on time. This past Memorial Day, I joined some of you at The Wall to begin the 50thanniversary of the Vietnam War. And it was another chance to say what should have beensaid all along: You did your duty, and you made us proud. And as this 50th anniversarycontinues, I’d ask all our Vietnam vets to stand, or raise your hand, as we say: Thank you andwelcome home.
Every generation among you served to keep us strong and free. And it falls to us, those thatfollow, to preserve what you won. Four years ago, I stood before you at a time of greatchallenge for our nation. We were engaged in two wars. Al Qaeda was entrenched in their safehavens in Pakistan. Many of our alliances were frayed. Our standing in the world hadsuffered. We were in the worst recession of our lifetimes.  Around the world, some questionedwhether the United States still had the capacity to lead.
  
So, four years ago, I made you a promise. I pledged to take the fight to our enemies, andrenew our leadership in the world. As President, that’s what I’ve done. And as you reflect onrecent years, as we look ahead to the challenges we face as a nation and the leadership that’srequired, you don’t just have my words, you have my deeds. You have my track record. Youhave the promises I’ve made and the promises that I’ve kept.
I pledged to end the war in Iraq honorably, and that’s what we’ve done. After I took office, weremoved nearly 150,000 U.S. troops from Iraq. And some said that bringing our troops homelast year was a mistake. They would have kept tens of thousands of our forces in Iraq --indefinitely, without a clear mission. Well, when you’re Commander-in-Chief, you owe thetroops a plan, you owe the country a plan -- and that includes recognizing not just when tobegin wars, but also how to end them.
So we brought our troops home responsibly. They left with their heads held high, knowingthey gave Iraqis a chance to forge their own future. And today, there are no Americansfighting in Iraq, and we are proud of all the Americans who served there.
I pledged to make it a priority to take out the terrorists who had attacked us on 9/11.  And asa candidate, I said that if we had Osama bin Laden in our sights, we would act to keepAmerica safe -- even if it meant going into Pakistan. Some of you remember, at the time, thatcomment drew quite a bit of criticism. But since I took office, we’ve worked with our allies andour partners to take out more top al Qaeda leaders than any time since 9/11. And thanks tothe courage and the skill of our forces, Osama bin Laden will never threaten America again,and al Qaeda is on the road to defeat.
I pledged to finish the job in Afghanistan. After years of drift, we had to break the momentumof the Taliban, and build up the capacity and the capability of Afghans.  And so, working withour commanders, we came up with a new strategy, and we ordered additional forces to getthe job done. This is still a tough fight. But thanks to the incredible services and sacrifices ofour troops, we pushed the Taliban back; we’re training Afghan forces; we’ve begun thetransition to Afghan lead.
Again, there are those who argued against a timeline for ending this war -- or against talkingabout it publicly. But you know what, that’s not a plan for America’s security either.  After 10years of war, and given the progress we’ve made, I felt it was important that the Americanpeople -- and our men and women in uniform -- know our plan to end this warresponsibly. And so by the end of this summer, more than 30,000 of our troops will havecome home. Next year, Afghans will take the lead for their own security. In 2014, thetransition will be complete. And even as our troops come home, we’ll have a strongpartnership with the Afghan people, and we will stay vigilant so Afghanistan is never again asource for attacks against America.
  
We’re not just ending these wars; we’re doing it in a way that achieves our objectives.Moreover, it’s allowed us to broaden our vision and begin a new era of Americanleadership. We’re leading from Europe to the Asia Pacific, with alliances that have never beenstronger. We’re leading the fight against nuclear dangers. We’ve applied the strongestsanctions ever on Iran and North Korea -- nations that cannot be allowed to threaten theworld with nuclear weapons. We’re leading on behalf of freedom -- standing with people in theMiddle East and North Africa as they demand their rights; protecting the Libyan people as theyrid the world of Muammar Qaddafi.
Today, we’re also working for a transition so the Syrian people can have a better future, freeof the Assad regime. And given the regime’s stockpiles of chemical weapons, we will continueto make it clear to Assad and those around him that the world is watching, and that they willbe held accountable by the international community and the United States, should they makethe tragic mistake of using those weapons. And we will continue to work with our friends andour allies and the Syrian opposition on behalf of the day when the Syrian people have agovernment that respects their basic rights to live in peace and freedom and dignity.
Because we’re leading around the world, people have a new attitude toward America. There’smore confidence in our leadership. We see it everywhere we go.  We saw it as gratefulLibyans waved American flags. We see it across the globe -- when people are asked, whichcountry do you admire the most, one nation comes out on top -- the United States of America.
So this is the progress that we’ve made. Thanks to the extraordinary service of our men andwomen in uniform, we’re winding down a decade of war; we’re destroying the terroristnetwork that attacked us; we’re strengthening the alliances that extend our values. Andtoday, every American can be proud that the United States is safer and stronger and morerespected in the world.
And all this allows us to fulfill another promise that I made to you four years ago --strengthening our military. After 10 years of operations, our soldiers will now have fewer andshorter deployments, which means more time on the home front to keep their families strong;more time to heal from the wounds of war; more time to improve readiness and prepare forfuture threats.
As President, I’ve continued to make historic investments to keep our armed forces strong.And guided by our new defense strategy, we will maintain our military superiority. It will besecond to none as long as I am President and well into the future.  We’ve got the best-trained,best-led, best-equipped military in history. And as Commander-in-Chief I am going to keep itthat way.
And by the way, given all the rhetoric lately -- it is political season -- let’s also set the recordstraight on the budget. Those big, across-the-board cuts, including defense, that Congresssaid would occur next year if they couldn’t reach a deal to reduce the deficit?
  
Let’s understand, first of all, there’s no reason that should happen, because people inCongress ought to be able to come together and agree on a plan, a balanced approach thatreduces the deficit and keeps our military strong. It should be done.
And there are a number of Republicans in Congress who don’t want you to know that most ofthem voted for these cuts. Now they’re trying to wriggle out of what they agreed to. Insteadof making tough choices to reduce the deficit, they’d rather protect tax cuts for some of thewealthiest Americans, even if it risks big cuts in our military.  And I’ve got to tell you, VFW, Idisagree. If the choice is between tax cuts that the wealthiest Americans don’t need andfunding our troops that they definitely need to keep our country strong, I will stand with ourtroops every single time.
So let’s stop playing politics with our military. Let’s get serious and reduce our deficit andkeep our military strong. Let’s take some of the money that we’re saving because we’re notfighting in Iraq and because we’re winding down in Afghanistan -- use half that money to paydown our deficit; let’s use half of it to do some nation-building here in the United States ofAmerica.
Let’s keep taking care of our extraordinary military families. For the first time ever, we’vemade military families and veterans a top priority not just at DOD, not just at the VA, butacross the government. As Richard mentioned, this has been a mission for my wife, Michelle,and Vice President Joe Biden’s wife, Dr. Jill Biden. Today, more people across America in everysegment of society are Joining Forces to give our military families the respect and the supportthat they deserve.
And there’s another way we can honor those who serve. It may no longer be a crime for conartists to pass themselves off as heroes, but one thing is certain -- it is contemptible. So thisweek, we will launch a new website, a living memorial, so the American people can see who’sbeen awarded our nation’s highest honors. Because no American hero should ever have theirvalor stolen.
This leads me to another promise I made four years ago -- upholding America’s sacred trustwith our veterans. I promised to strengthen the VA, and that promise has been kept. In myfirst year, we achieved the largest percentage increase in the VA budget in 30 years. Andwe’re going to keep making historic investments in our veterans. When Richard came to theOval Office, we talked about what those automatic budget cuts -- sequestration -- could meanfor the VA. So my Administration has made it clear: Your veteran’s benefits are exempt fromsequestration. They are exempt. And because advance appropriations is now the law of theland, veterans' health care is protected from the budget battles in Washington.
I promised you that I’d stand up for veterans' health care. As long as I’m President, I will notallow VA health care to be turned into a voucher system, subject to the whims of theinsurance market. Some have argued for this plan. I could not disagree more. You don’t needvouchers, you need the VA health care that you have earned and that you depend on.
  
So we’ve made dramatic investments to help care for our veterans. For our Vietnam veterans,we declared that more illnesses are now presumed connected to your exposure to AgentOrange. As a result of our decision, Vietnam-era vets and your families received nearly 4billion dollars in disability pay. You needed it; you fought for it. We heard you and we got itdone.
We’ve added mobile clinics for our rural veterans; more tailored care for our women veterans;unprecedented support for veterans with Traumatic Brain Injury. All tolled, we’ve made VAhealth care available to nearly 800,000 veterans who didn’t have it before. And we’re nowsupporting caregivers and families with the skills and the stipends to help care for theveterans that they love.
Of course, more veterans in the system means more claims. So we’ve hired thousands ofclaims processors. We’re investing in paperless systems. To their credit, the dedicated folks atthe VA are now completing one million claims a year. But there’s been a tidal wave of newclaims. And when I hear about veterans waiting months, or years, for your benefits -- it isunacceptable. And we are doing something about it.
We’re taking all those folks who processed your Agent Orange claims -- more than 1,200experts -- and giving them a new mission:  Attack the backlog. We’re prioritizing veteranswith the most serious disabilities. And the VA and DOD will work harder towards a seamlesstransition so new veterans aren’t just piled on to the backlog. And we will not rest -- I will notbe satisfied until we get this right. And today, I’m also calling on all those who help our vetscomplete their claims -- state VAs, physicians and veteran groups like the VFW -- to joinus. You know how this can work better, so let’s get it done, together.
We’re also focused on the urgent needs of our veterans with PTSD. We’ve poured tremendousresources into this fight -- thousands of more counselors and more clinicians, more care andmore treatment. And we've made it easier for veterans with PTSD to qualify for VA benefits.But after a decade of war, it’s now an epidemic.  We’re losing more troops to suicide -- oneevery single day -- than we are in combat. According to some estimates, about 18 veteransare taking their lives each day -- more every year than all the troops killed in Iraq andAfghanistan combined.  That's a tragedy. It's heartbreaking. It should not be happening in theUnited States of America.
So when I hear about servicemembers and veterans who had the courage to seek help butdidn’t get it, who died waiting, that's an outrage. And I’ve told Secretary Panetta, ChairmanDempsey and Secretary Shinseki we’ve got to do better. This has to be all hands on deck.
So our message to everyone who’s ever worn the uniform -- if you’re hurting, it’s not a sign ofweakness to seek help, it’s a sign of strength. And when you do, we’ll be there and do more tohelp -- including more counselors and clinicians to help you heal. We need to end this tragedy,VFW. And we're going to work together to make it happen.
  
So, too with our campaign to end homelessness among our veterans. We’ve now helped tobring tens of thousands of veterans off the streets and into permanent housing. This has to bea core mission, because every veteran who has fought for America ought to have a home inAmerica.
And this brings me to the last promise I want to discuss with you. Four years ago, I said thatI’d do everything I could to help our veterans realize the American Dream, to enlist you inbuilding a stronger America. After all, our veterans have the skills that America needs. Sotoday, our economy is growing and creating jobs, but it’s still too hard for too many folks tofind work, especially our younger veterans, our veterans from Iraq and Afghanistan. And witha million more troops rejoining civilian life in the years ahead -- and looking for work -- we’vegot to step up our game, at every stage of their careers.
So today, I’m announcing a major overhaul of our transition assistance program. We’re goingto set up a kind of "reverse boot camp" for our departing servicemembers. Starting this year,they’ll get more personalized assistance as they plan their careers. We’ll provide the trainingthey need to find that job, or pursue that education, or start that business. And just asthey’ve maintained their military readiness, we’ll have new standards of "career readiness."
In addition, by making the Post-9/11 GI Bill a priority, we’ve helped more than 800,000veterans and their families pursue their education. And I’ve issued an executive order to helpput a stop to schools that are ripping off our veterans.
I’ve directed the federal government to step up on jobs. Since I took office, we’ve hired morethan 200,000 veterans into the federal government. We made it a priority. And we’re keepingtrack -- every agency, every department: What are you doing for our veterans?
I’ve challenged community health centers to hire thousands of veterans as physicians andnurses. And as we help local communities hire new police officers and firefighters and firstresponders, we’re giving a preference to veterans.
We’re also fighting to get more vets hired in the private sector. With new tools like our onlineVeterans Jobs Bank, we’re connecting veterans directly to jobs. We’re helping thousands ofveterans get certified for good-paying jobs in manufacturing. We succeeded in passing taxcredits for businesses that hire our veterans and our wounded warriors. And this morning, Isigned into law the Veteran Skills to Jobs Act -- making it easier for veterans to transfer theiroutstanding military skills into the licenses and credentials they need to get civilian jobs.
If you are a young man that is in charge of a platoon or millions of dollars of equipment andare taking responsibility, or you’re a medic out in the field who is saving lives every single day-- when you come home, you need to be credentialed and certified quickly so you can get onthe job. People should understand how skilled you are. And there shouldn’t be bureaucrats orrunarounds. We’ve got to put those folks to work.
  
Last summer, I also challenged the private sector to hire or train 100,000 veterans or theirspouses. Michelle and Jill Biden have been leading the effort, through Joining Forces. And sofar, thousands of patriotic businesses have hired or trained more than 90,000 veterans andspouses. And our message to companies is simple: If you want somebody who gets the jobdone, then hire a vet. Hire a vet. Hire a vet and they will make you proud just like they’vemade America proud.
And we’re fighting for veterans who want to start their own businesses, including moretraining in entrepreneurship. It’s one of the reasons we’ve cut taxes -- 18 times for smallbusinesses, including veteran-owned businesses. And the effects ripple out, because vets aremore likely to hire vets.
So today, we can point to progress. More veterans are finding jobs; the unemployment ratefor veterans has come down. Yes, it’s still too high, but it’s coming down. And now we’ve gotto sustain that momentum. It’s one of the reasons I’ve proposed to Congress a Veterans JobsCorps to put our veterans back to work protecting and rebuilding America. And today, I amagain calling on Congress: Pass this Veterans Jobs Corps and extend the tax credits forbusinesses that hire veterans so we can give these American heroes the jobs andopportunities that they deserve.
So, VFW, these are the promises that I made. These are the promises that I’ve kept.  Wherewe still have more to do, we will not rest. That’s my vow to you. I’ve got your back. I’ve gotyour six. Because we have a solemn obligation to all who serve -- not just for the years you’rein uniform, but for all the decades that follow, and because even though today’s wars areending, the hard work of taking care of our newest veterans has only just begun.
Just as you protected America, we’re going to pass our country to the next generation,stronger and safer and more respected in the world. So if anyone tries to tell you that ourgreatness has passed, that America is in decline, you tell them this: Just like the 20th century,the 21st is going to be another great American Century. For we are Americans, blessed withthe greatest form of government ever devised by man, a democracy dedicated to freedom andcommitted to the ideals that still light the world. We will never apologize for our way of life;we will never waver in its defense.
We are a nation that freed millions and turned adversaries into allies. We are the Americanswho defended the peace and turned back aggression. We are Americans who welcome ourglobal responsibilities and our global leadership. The United States has been, and will remain,the one indispensable nation in world affairs.
And you, you are the soldiers, the sailors, the airmen, the Marines and the Coast Guardsmenwho have kept us strong. We will honor your legacy. And we will ensure that the military youserved, and the America that we love, remains the greatest force for freedom that the worldhas ever known.
  
God bless you.
God bless all of our veterans.
And God bless the United States of America.
