I, Barack Hussein Obama, do solemnly swear that I will execute the office of the President of theUnited States faithfully1, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and defend theConstitution of the United States, so help me God.
Thank you, thank you.
My fellow citizens:
I stand here today humbled by the task before us, grateful for the trust you've bestowed,mindful of the sacrifices borne by our ancestors. I thank President Bush for his service to ournation, as well as the generosity and cooperation he has shown throughout this transition. 
Forty-four Americans have now taken the presidential Oath. The words have been spokenduring rising tides of prosperity and the still waters of peace. Yet, every so often the Oath istaken amidst gathering clouds and raging storms.

At these moments, America has carried on not simply because of the skill or vision of those inhigh office, but because We the People have remained faithful to the ideals of our forebearers[sic], and true to our founding documents.
So it has been. So it must be with this generation of Americans.
That we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood. Our nation is at war, against a far-
reaching network of violence and hatred. Our economy is badly weakened, a consequence ofgreed and irresponsibility on the part of some, but also our collective failure to make hardchoices and prepare the nation for a new age. Homes have been lost; jobs shed; businessesshuttered. Our health care is too costly; our schools fail too many; and each day bringsfurther evidence that the ways we use energy strengthen our adversaries and threaten ourplanet.
These are the indicators of crisis, subject to data and statistics. Less measurable, but no lessprofound, is a sapping of confidence across our land -- a nagging fear that America's decline isinevitable, that the next generation must lower its sights. 
Today I say to you that the challenges we face are real. They are serious and they are many.They will not be met easily or in a short span of time. But know this, America: They will bemet.
On this day, we gather because we have chosen hope over fear, unity of purpose over conflictand discord.
On this day, we come to proclaim an end to the petty grievances and false promises, therecriminations and worn out dogmas, that for far too long have strangled our politics. 
We remain a young nation, but in the words of Scripture, the time has come to "set asidechildish things."2 The time has come to reaffirm our enduring spirit; to choose our betterhistory; to carry forward that precious gift, that noble idea, passed on from generation togeneration: the God-given promise that all are equal, all are free, and all deserve a chance topursue their full measure of happiness.
In reaffirming the greatness of our nation, we understand that greatness is never a given. Itmust be earned. Our journey has never been one of short-cuts or settling for less. It has notbeen the path for the faint-hearted -- for those who prefer leisure over work, or seek only thepleasures of riches and fame. Rather, it has been the risk-takers, the doers, the makers ofthings -- some celebrated but more often men and women obscure in their labor, who havecarried us up the long, rugged path towards prosperity and freedom.
For us, they packed up their few worldly possessions and traveled across oceans in search of anew life.

For us, they toiled in sweatshops and settled the West; endured the lash of the whip andplowed the hard earth.
For us, they fought and died, in places like Concord and Gettysburg; Normandy and Khe Sahn.
Time and again these men and women struggled and sacrificed and worked till their handswere raw so that we might live a better life. They saw America as bigger than the sum of ourindividual ambitions; greater than all the differences of birth or wealth or faction.
This is the journey we continue today. We remain the most prosperous, powerful nation onEarth. Our workers are no less productive than when this crisis began. Our minds are no lessinventive, our goods and services no less needed than they were last week or last month orlast year. Our capacity remains undiminished. But our time of standing pat, of protectingnarrow interests and putting off unpleasant decisions - that time has surely passed. Startingtoday, we must pick ourselves up, dust ourselves off, and begin again the work of remakingAmerica.
For everywhere we look, there is work to be done. The state of our economy calls for action,bold and swift, and we will act -- not only to create new jobs, but to lay a new foundation forgrowth. We will build the roads and bridges, the electric grids and digital lines that feed ourcommerce and bind us together. We will restore science to its rightful place, and wieldtechnology's wonders to raise health care's quality and lower its cost. We will harness the sunand the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and run our factories. And we will transform ourschools and colleges and universities to meet the demands of a new age.
All this we can do.
All this we will do.
Now, there are some who question the scale of our ambitions -- who suggest that our systemcannot tolerate too many big plans. Their memories are short. For they have forgotten whatthis country has already done; what free men and women can achieve when imagination isjoined to common purpose, and necessity to courage.
What the cynics fail to understand is that the ground has shifted beneath them -- that thestale political arguments that have consumed us for so long no longer apply. The question weask today is not whether our government is too big or too small, but whether it works --whether it helps families find jobs at a decent wage, care they can afford, a retirement that isdignified. Where the answer is yes, we intend to move forward. Where the answer is no,programs will end. And those of us who manage the public's dollars will be held to account --to spend wisely, reform bad habits, and do our business in the light of day -- because onlythen can we restore the vital trust between a people and their government.

Nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or ill. Its power togenerate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched, but this crisis has reminded us thatwithout a watchful eye, the market can spin out of control. The nation cannot prosper longwhen it favors only the prosperous. The success of our economy has always depended not juston the size of our Gross Domestic Product, but on the reach of our prosperity; on the ability toextend opportunity to every willing heart -- not out of charity, but because it is the surestroute to our common good.
As for our common defense, we reject as false the choice between our safety and our ideals.Our Founding Fathers, faced with perils that we can scarcely imagine, drafted a charter toassure the rule of law and the rights of man, a charter expanded by the blood of generations.Those ideals still light the world, and we will not give them up for expedience'[s] sake. And soto all the other peoples and governments who are watching today, from the grandest capitalsto the small village where my father was born: Know that America is a friend of each nationand every man, woman, and child who seeks a future of peace and dignity. And we are readyto lead once more. 
Recall that earlier generations faced down fascism and communism not just with missiles andtanks, but with the sturdy alliances and enduring convictions. They understood that our poweralone cannot protect us, nor does it entitle us to do as we please. Instead, they knew that ourpower grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause,the force of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.
We are the keepers of this legacy. Guided by these principles once more, we can meet thosenew threats that demand even greater effort -- even greater cooperation and understandingbetween nations. We will begin to responsibly leave Iraq to its people, and forge a hard-
earned peace in Afghanistan. With old friends and former foes, we will work tirelessly tolessen the nuclear threat, and roll back the specter of a warming planet. We will not apologizefor our way of life, nor will we waver in its defense, and for those who seek to advance theiraims by inducing terror and slaughtering innocents, we say to you now that our spirit isstronger and cannot be broken. You cannot outlast us, and we will defeat you!
For we know that our patchwork heritage is a strength, not a weakness. We are a nation ofChristians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus -- and non-believers. We are shaped by everylanguage and culture, drawn from every end of this Earth; and because we have tasted thebitter swill of civil war and segregation, and emerged from that dark chapter stronger andmore united, we cannot help but believe that the old hatreds shall someday pass; that thelines of tribe shall soon dissolve; that as the world grows smaller, our common humanity shallreveal itself; and that America must play its role in ushering in a new era of peace.
To the Muslim world, we seek a new way forward, based on mutual interest and mutualrespect. To those leaders around the globe who seek to sow conflict, or blame their society'sills on the West -- know that your people will judge you on what you can build, not what youdestroy.

To those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the silencing of dissent, knowthat you are on the wrong side of history; but that we will extend a hand if you are willing tounclench your fist.
To the people of poor nations, we pledge to work alongside you to make your farms flourishand let clean waters flow; to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds. And to thosenations like ours that enjoy relative plenty, we say we can no longer afford indifference to thesuffering outside our borders; nor can we consume the world's resources without regard toeffect. For the world has changed, and we must change with it.
As we consider the road that unfolds before us, we remember with humble gratitude thosebrave Americans who, at this very hour, patrol far-off deserts and distant mountains. Theyhave something to tell us, just as the fallen heroes who lie in Arlington whisper through theages. We honor them not only because they are the guardians of our liberty, but because theyembody the spirit of service; a willingness to find meaning in something greater thanthemselves. And yet, at this moment -- a moment that will define a generation -- it isprecisely this spirit that must inhabit us all.
For as much as government can do and must do, it is ultimately the faith and determination ofthe American people upon which this nation relies. It is the kindness to take in a strangerwhen the levees break, the selflessness of workers who would rather cut their hours than seea friend lose their job which sees us through our darkest hours. It is the firefighter's courageto storm a stairway filled with smoke, but also a parent's willingness to nurture a child, thatfinally decides our fate. 
Our challenges may be new. The instruments with which we meet them may be new. Butthose values upon which our success depends -- honesty and hard work, courage and fairplay, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism -- these things are old. These things aretrue. They have been the quiet force of progress throughout our history. What is demandedthen is a return to these truths. What is required of us now is a new era of responsibility -- arecognition, on the part of every American, that we have duties to ourselves, our nation, andthe world, duties that we do not grudgingly accept but rather seize gladly, firm in theknowledge that there is nothing so satisfying to the spirit, so defining of our character, thangiving our all to a difficult task.
This is the price and the promise of citizenship.
This is the source of our confidence -- the knowledge that God calls on us to shape anuncertain destiny.
This is the meaning of our liberty and our creed -- why men and women and children of everyrace and every faith can join in celebration across this magnificent mall, and why a manwhose father less than sixty years ago might not have been served at a local restaurant cannow stand before you to take a most sacred Oath.

So let us mark this day with remembrance, of who we are and how far we have traveled. Inthe year of America's birth, in the coldest of months, a small band of patriots huddled bydying campfires on the shores of an icy river. The Capitol was abandoned. The enemy wasadvancing. The snow was stained with blood. At a moment when the outcome of ourrevolution was most in doubt, the father of our nation ordered these words be read to thepeople:
Let it be told to the future world...that in the depth of winter, when nothing but hopeand virtue could survive...that the city and the country, alarmed at one commondanger, came forth to meet [it].
America: In the face of our common dangers, in this winter of our hardship, let us rememberthese timeless words. With hope and virtue, let us brave once more the icy currents, andendure what storms may come. Let it be said by our children's children that when we weretested we refused to let this journey end, that we did not turn back nor did we falter; and witheyes fixed on the horizon and God's grace upon us, we carried forth that great gift of freedomand delivered it safely to future generations.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.