My fellow Americans, tonight, I’d like to talk with you about immigration.
For more than 200 years, our tradition of welcoming immigrants from around the world hasgiven us a tremendous advantage over other nations. It’s kept us youthful, dynamic, andentrepreneurial. It has shaped our character as a people with limitless possibilities -- peoplenot trapped by our past, but able to remake ourselves as we choose.
But today, our immigration system is broken -- and everybody knows it.
Families who enter our country the right way and play by the rules watch others flout therules. Business owners who offer their workers good wages and benefits see the competitionexploit undocumented immigrants by paying them far less. All of us take offense to anyonewho reaps the rewards of living in America without taking on the responsibilities of living inAmerica. And undocumented immigrants who desperately want to embrace thoseresponsibilities see little option but to remain in the shadows, or risk their families being tornapart.
It’s been this way for decades. And for decades, we haven’t done much about it.
When I took office, I committed to fixing this broken immigration system. And I began bydoing what I could to secure our borders. Today, we have more agents and technologydeployed to secure our southern border than at any time in our history. And over the past sixyears, illegal border crossings have been cut by more than half.
                                                                          
  
Although this summer, there was a brief spike in unaccompanied children being apprehendedat our border, the number of such children is now actually lower than it’s been in nearly twoyears. Overall, the number of people trying to cross our border illegally is at its lowest levelsince the 1970s. Those are the facts.
Meanwhile, I worked with Congress on a comprehensive fix, and last year, 68 Democrats,Republicans, and independents came together to pass a bipartisan bill in the Senate. It wasn’tperfect. It was a compromise. But it reflected common sense. It would have doubled thenumber of border patrol agents while giving undocumented immigrants a pathway tocitizenship if they paid a fine, started paying their taxes, and went to the back of the line. Andindependent experts said that it would help grow our economy and shrink our deficits.
Had the House of Representatives allowed that kind of bill a simple yes-or-no vote, it wouldhave passed with support from both parties, and today it would be the law. But for a year anda half now, Republican leaders in the House have refused to allow that simple vote.
Now, I continue to believe that the best way to solve this problem is by working together topass that kind of common sense law. But until that happens, there are actions I have the legalauthority to take as President -- the same kinds of actions taken by Democratic andRepublican presidents before me -- that will help make our immigration system more fair andmore just.
Tonight, I am announcing those actions.
First, we’ll build on our progress at the border with additional resources for our lawenforcement personnel so that they can stem the flow of illegal crossings, and speed thereturn of those who do cross over.
Second, I’ll make it easier and faster for high-skilled immigrants, graduates, andentrepreneurs to stay and contribute to our economy, as so many business leaders haveproposed.
Third, we’ll take steps to deal responsibly with the millions of undocumented immigrants whoalready live in our country.
I want to say more about this third issue, because it generates the most passion andcontroversy. Even as we are a nation of immigrants, we’re also a nation of laws.Undocumented workers broke our immigration laws, and I believe that they must be heldaccountable -- especially those who may be dangerous. That’s why, over the past six years,deportations of criminals are up 80 percent. And that’s why we’re going to keep focusingenforcement resources on actual threats to our security. Felons, not families. Criminals, notchildren. Gang members, not a mom who’s working hard to provide for her kids. We’llprioritize, just like law enforcement does every day.
                                                                          
  
But even as we focus on deporting criminals, the fact is, millions of immigrants in every state,of every race and nationality still live here illegally. And let’s be honest -- tracking down,rounding up, and deporting millions of people isn’t realistic. Anyone who suggests otherwiseisn’t being straight with you. It’s also not who we are as Americans. After all, most of theseimmigrants have been here a long time. They work hard, often in tough, low-paying jobs.They support their families. They worship at our churches. Many of their kids are American-
born or spent most of their lives here, and their hopes, dreams, and patriotism are just likeours. As my predecessor, President Bush, once put it: “They are a part of American life.”
Now here’s the thing: We expect people who live in this country to play by the rules. Weexpect that those who cut the line will not be unfairly rewarded. So we’re going to offer thefollowing deal: If you’ve been in America for more than five years; if you have children whoare American citizens or legal residents; if you register, pass a criminal background check,and you’re willing to pay your fair share of taxes -- you’ll be able to apply to stay in thiscountry temporarily without fear of deportation. You can come out of the shadows and getright with the law. That’s what this deal is.
Now, let’s be clear about what it isn’t. This deal does not apply to anyone who has come tothis country recently. It does not apply to anyone who might come to America illegally in thefuture. It does not grant citizenship, or the right to stay here permanently, or offer the samebenefits that citizens receive -- only Congress can do that. All we’re saying is we’re not goingto deport you.
I know some of the critics of this action call it amnesty. Well, it’s not. Amnesty is theimmigration system we have today -- millions of people who live here without paying theirtaxes or playing by the rules while politicians use the issue to scare people and whip up votesat election time.
That’s the real amnesty -- leaving this broken system the way it is. Mass amnesty would beunfair. Mass deportation would be both impossible and contrary to our character. What I’mdescribing is accountability -- a common-sense, middle-ground approach: If you meet thecriteria, you can come out of the shadows and get right with the law. If you’re a criminal,you’ll be deported. If you plan to enter the U.S. illegally, your chances of getting caught andsent back just went up.
The actions I’m taking are not only lawful, they’re the kinds of actions taken by every singleRepublican President and every single Democratic President for the past half century. And tothose members of Congress who question my authority to make our immigration system workbetter, or question the wisdom of me acting where Congress has failed, I have one answer:Pass a bill.
I want to work with both parties to pass a more permanent legislative solution. And the day Isign that bill into law, the actions I take will no longer be necessary. Meanwhile, don’t let adisagreement over a single issue be a dealbreaker on every issue.
                                                                          
  
That’s not how our democracy works, and Congress certainly shouldn’t shut down ourgovernment again just because we disagree on this. Americans are tired of gridlock. What ourcountry needs from us right now is a common purpose -- a higher purpose.
Most Americans support the types of reforms I’ve talked about tonight. But I understand thedisagreements held by many of you at home. Millions of us, myself included, go backgenerations in this country, with ancestors who put in the painstaking work to becomecitizens. So we don’t like the notion that anyone might get a free pass to American citizenship.
I know some worry immigration will change the very fabric of who we are, or take our jobs, orstick it to middle-class families at a time when they already feel like they’ve gotten the rawdeal for over a decade. I hear these concerns. But that’s not what these steps would do. Ourhistory and the facts show that immigrants are a net plus for our economy and our society.And I believe it’s important that all of us have this debate without impugning each other’scharacter.
Because for all the back and forth of Washington, we have to remember that this debate isabout something bigger. It’s about who we are as a country, and who we want to be for futuregenerations.
Are we a nation that tolerates the hypocrisy of a system where workers who pick our fruit andmake our beds never have a chance to get right with the law? Or are we a nation that givesthem a chance to make amends, take responsibility, and give their kids a better future?
Are we a nation that accepts the cruelty of ripping children from their parents’ arms? Or arewe a nation that values families, and works together to keep them together?
Are we a nation that educates the world’s best and brightest in our universities, only to sendthem home to create businesses in countries that compete against us? Or are we a nation thatencourages them to stay and create jobs here, create businesses here, create industries righthere in America?
That’s what this debate is all about. We need more than politics as usual when it comes toimmigration. We need reasoned, thoughtful, compassionate debate that focuses on our hopes,not our fears. I know the politics of this issue are tough. But let me tell you why I have cometo feel so strongly about it.
Over the past few years, I have seen the determination of immigrant fathers who worked twoor three jobs without taking a dime from the government, and at risk any moment of losing itall, just to build a better life for their kids. I’ve seen the heartbreak and anxiety of childrenwhose mothers might be taken away from them just because they didn’t have the rightpapers. I’ve seen the courage of students who, except for the circumstances of their birth, areas American as Malia or Sasha; students who bravely come out as undocumented in hopesthey could make a difference in the country they love.
                                                                          
  
These people -- our neighbors, our classmates, our friends -- they did not come here in searchof a free ride or an easy life. They came to work, and study, and serve in our military, andabove all, contribute to America’s success.
Tomorrow, I’ll travel to Las Vegas and meet with some of these students, including a youngwoman named Astrid Silva. Astrid was brought to America when she was four years old. Heronly possessions were a cross, her doll, and the frilly dress she had on. When she startedschool, she didn’t speak any English. She caught up to other kids by reading newspapers andwatching PBS, and she became a good student. Her father worked in landscaping. Her momcleaned other people’s homes. They wouldn’t let Astrid apply to a technology magnet school,not because they didn’t love her, but because they were afraid the paperwork would out heras an undocumented immigrant -- so she applied behind their back and got in. Still, shemostly lived in the shadows -- until her grandmother, who visited every year from Mexico,passed away, and she couldn’t travel to the funeral without risk of being found out anddeported. It was around that time she decided to begin advocating for herself and others likeher, and today, Astrid Silva is a college student working on her third degree.
Are we a nation that kicks out a striving, hopeful immigrant like Astrid, or are we a nation thatfinds a way to welcome her in? Scripture tells us that we shall not oppress a stranger, for weknow the heart of a stranger -- we were strangers once, too.
My fellow Americans, we are and always will be a nation of immigrants. We were strangersonce, too. And whether our forebears were strangers who crossed the Atlantic, or the Pacific,or the Rio Grande, we are here only because this country welcomed them in, and taught themthat to be an American is about something more than what we look like, or what our lastnames are, or how we worship. What makes us Americans is our shared commitment to anideal -- that all of us are created equal, and all of us have the chance to make of our liveswhat we will.
That’s the country our parents and grandparents and generations before them built for us.That’s the tradition we must uphold. That’s the legacy we must leave for those who are yet tocome.
Thank you. God bless you. And God bless this country we love.
                                                                          
