Hello, everybody.  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  Everybody, please have a seat.  Welcometo the White House Conference on Aging, everybody.  And please give Vicki a big round ofapplause for the outstanding work she’s doing to help women and families prepare forretirement.  
I want to thank the members of Congress who are here, those in my administration who’vebeen working on this issue.  I want to especially point out one of my favorite former membersof Congress, a legend who’s here today -- John Dingell.   John, thank you.
John was elected to Congress when he was just 29 -- an over-achiever.  Ten years later, hepresided over the House chamber for the vote to pass Medicare into law -- an achievement forwhich he and his father can take some credit.  Last week, John turned 89 -- so we want towish John a happy birthday.  He’s been a retiree for six months, but he’s keeping busy -- justcheck out his Twitter feed if you don’t believe me.  So he’s still got some pretty strongopinions.
It is wonderful to be here with all of you.  Many of you have devoted your careers toadvocating for older Americans.  You understand the whole terrain -- not just the challenges,but also the opportunities; not only the questions we’re asking today but the questions thatwe have to start thinking about for tomorrow. And because this conference takes place justonce a decade, we’ve got to make it count.
  
So one of the best measures of a country is how it treats its older citizens.  And by thatmeasure, the United States has a lot to be proud of.  Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security aresome of our greatest triumphs as a nation.  When Social Security was signed into law, far toomany seniors were living in poverty.  When Medicare was created, only a little more than halfof all seniors had some form of insurance.  Before Medicaid came along, families often had nohelp paying for nursing home costs.  Today, the number of seniors in poverty has fallendramatically.  Every American over 65 has access to affordable health care.  And, by the way,since the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, the uninsured rate for all Americans hasfallen by about one-third.  Just thought I'd mention that.
Together we declared that every citizen of this country deserves a basic measure of securityand dignity.  That choice saved millions upon millions of our people from poverty, allowedthem to live longer and better lives.  So we got to be proud of that.  These Americanendeavors didn’t just make our country better, it reaffirmed our greatness as a country.  Andit’s hard to find a single American whose life hasn’t been enriched by these covenants in somefashion.
My grandmother was a fiercely independent woman.  She helped to raise me.  She didn’t havea college degree.  She worked her way up, working on bomber assembly lines -- Rosie theRiveter -- during the war, and then went on, got a job as a secretary and then kept onworking her way up until she was vice president of a local bank.  And after my grandfatherdied, she chose to live independently.  And Medicare and Social Security allowed her to makethat choice.
She had the confidence that, having worked hard, played by the rules, she was rewarded witha safe foundation for retirement and she could not fall through those cracks.  That was apromise this country made to her and all its citizens.  And as a grateful grandson -- whohappens to be President -- that is a promise I'm going to make sure we're going to keep forfuture generations.  We've got to make sure that it's there for people who are working today.
But we’re going to have work for it.  We have to work to do more to ensure that every olderAmerican has the resources and the support that they need to thrive.  That challenge --protecting our seniors, dealing with the rising costs of an aging generation, ensuring we haveenough home care workers looking out for our family members -- maximizing thecontributions that older Americans can make to our country -- these challenges are justbecoming more urgent.
And here’s why.  When we won World War II, everyone came home and had babies.  I mean,not literally, everyone, but a lot of people had babies.  And now, each and every day, almost10,000 of those babies turn 65 years old.  So more than 250,000 Americans turn 65 everymonth.  They’re living longer and they’re living healthier.  We’re seeing people break athleticrecords in their 60s.
  
Diana Nyad is here today, by the way.  You do not want to race her in anything.  Arguably thetoughest justice on the Supreme Court is the oldest -- Ruth Bader Ginsburg -- also known asthe Notorious R.B.G.  She’s tough.
In just about every field, Americans who once might have been dismissed as out of touch orpast their primes are making vital contributions in every field.  And all of us, as aconsequence, are able to raise our own ambitions about what we hope to achieve in ourgolden years.  And since I’m living out dog years here in the presidency -- this is somethingI’m paying a lot of attention to.  Look at this hair.   Although I do have hair.  Crowley waslaughing a little bit too much over here.
So since these golden years are coming pretty fast, I want to make sure that we briefly focuson what we’ve done to strengthen already Medicare, and take a longer look at what we haveto do to strengthen retirement even more.
Now, we’re often told that Medicare and Social Security are in crisis.  We hear that all thetime.  And usually, that’s used as an excuse to try to cut spending on those bedrockprograms.  But here’s the truth.  Medicare and Social Security are not in crisis, nor have theykept us from cutting our deficits by two-thirds since I took office.  Both programs are facingchallenges because of the demographic trends I just talked about.  And for Medicare, thatmeans we’ve got to keep slowing the growth of health care costs, and keep building on theprogress we’ve already made in the past few years.
Since I signed the Affordable Care Act -- also known as Obamacare -- since we signed theACA into law, we’ve extended the life of the Medicare Trust Fund by 13 years.  We’re movingMedicare towards payment models that require quality of care instead of quantity of care asthe measure of what you get paid, creating a different set of incentives.  And that’s somethingthat will keep older Americans healthy and Medicare healthy as well.  What’s more, this lawhas saved over 9 million people on Medicare currently more than $15 billion on theirprescriptions.
Now, that doesn’t get a lot of notice, but I want everybody to understand.  Built into theAffordable Care Act, 9 million seniors have gotten significant discounts on their prescriptiondrugs.  They don’t always know that it’s because of Obamacare, but that’s why they’ve beenpaying cheaper drug prices.  It’s also given nearly 40 million people on Medicare freepreventive health services.  And we’ve expanded the options for home- and community-basedservices offered by Medicaid, which means that more older Americans are able to make thesame choice that my grandmother did and live independently.
So those are some areas we’ve made progress.  And Sylvia Burwell, who’s here, our Secretaryof Health and Human Services, I’m sure at some point during this conference will be talkingabout additional steps that we need to be taking to further improve a delivery system.
  
And understand, the goal here is not to cut back on services.  The goal is to make sure thatyou’re getting more of the services that you need, less of the services you don’t, so you’ve gotmore money left over to do even more stuff that you need to keep you healthy and active andthriving.  Because we have too much waste in the system that’s not benefitting patients, butoftentimes just has to do with a really inefficient system or, in some cases, works really wellfor providers but doesn’t work well for the consumer.
Now, even as we’re dealing with the health care side, we also know that too many olderAmericans leave the workforce without having saved enough for a dignified retirement.  Andit’s not as if they haven’t tried -- Vicki touched on this issue.  There are a lot of folks out herewho work really, really hard, but at the end of the day just still don’t have enough of a nestegg.  In today’s economy, preparing for retirement has gotten tougher.
First of all, most workers don’t have a traditional pension -- what we used to understand as adefined benefit pension where you were guaranteed a certain amount every year once youretired. A Social Security check on its own oftentimes is not enough.  And even though, as aconsequence of some of the steps that we took, we pulled ourselves out of a terrible financialcrisis and the stock market has now doubled since I took office -- which means that it’sreplenished the 401(k)s for millions of families -- so that’s been important for millions offamilies across the country, but a lot of people don’t have any kind of retirement account atall.
So we’re going to have to work hard to deal with these issues.  Number one, we have to keepSocial Security strong, protecting its future solvency.  And I think there are ways, creativeways that people are talking about to protect its future solvency, but also strengthenretirement security for our most vulnerable neighbors.  So that’s step number one.
Step number two -- for Americans who are doing the hard work of saving for retirement, let’smake sure that they get a fair deal.  Earlier this year, I announced new steps we’re taking toprotect Americans by cracking down on conflicts of interest in retirement advice.  The goalhere is to put an end to Wall Street brokers who benefit from backdoor payments or hiddenfees at the expense of their clients.  If they are advising you on how to save your money, theyshould be looking out for you -- not for somebody who’s selling a product that may not bebest for you.  And for the many brokers out there who are doing the right thing, this rulelevels the playing field for them and their customers. The notion here is, is we want to makesure responsibility is rewarded and not exploited.  So there’s a consumer protection elementto this whole thing.
Number three -- we’ve got to make it easier for people to save for retirement.  And today, I’mpleased to announce an important step that we’re taking to do just that.  Right now, aboutone-third of American workers do not have access to a retirement plan at work -- one-third.That’s why every budget request I’ve submitted since taking office has included a common-
  
sense proposal to automatically enroll workers without access to a workplace retirement planin an IRA, which would provide an additional 30 million Americans with access to a retirementplan at work.
Now, unfortunately, Congress has repeatedly failed to act on this idea.  The good news isstates are stepping up -– just like they’re stepping up in other areas where Congress is notdoing its work, like raising the minimum wage or making paid sick leave available for workingfamilies.  So far, a handful of states have passed laws to create new ways for people without aworkplace plan to save for retirement.  And more than 20 states are thinking about doing thesame.
We want to do everything we can to encourage more states to take this step.  So I’ve calledon the Department of Labor and Tom Perez to propose a set of rules by the end of the year toprovide a clear path forward for states to create retirement savings programs.  And if everystate did this, tens of millions more Americans could save for retirement at work.
I want to emphasize this point.  It is perverse that in this country it is just easier to save ifyou’ve already got money.  And I’m talking about not just the fact that you’ve got money tosave; I’m talking about just the mechanics, the mechanisms of being able to save, and thentake advantage of the tax benefits of saving.  So if we can just make sure that everybody,even if your employer doesn’t provide those mechanisms, you still have a way of accessing it,every dollar you put in, that’s going to be a dollar that also then benefits from the same kindsof tax advantages that somebody with a million dollars is able to take advantage of all thetime.
And that’s just fair.  That’s only fair.  And that’s all we’re trying to do here, is make sure thatif you’re working hard out there, even if you’re not making goo-gobs of money and don’t havefancy financial advisors and all that, that you can still put away a little nest egg so that you’reprotected when you get older.
So this is just one of a number of steps that we’re going to be taking to improve the lives ofolder Americans.  As many of you know, over the past year, we’ve held regional forums withAARP across the country, heard lots of ideas from people, including folks in this room, abouthow we can make things better -- especially for families and caregivers.  So we’re going to bemoving ahead with several of the ideas that you’ve given us.
For example, we’re going to make it easier for folks who are homebound to get nutritionalassistance.  We’re going to update quality and safety requirements for thousands of nursinghomes -- the first major overhaul in nearly 25 years.  We’re going to train more prosecutors inhow to combat elder abuse.  We’re going to work with Congress to reauthorize the OlderAmericans Act -- because we know it will provide critical support to families and communities.
We’re going to help federal workers and their supervisors better understand how our policieson workplace flexibility can support employees who are also caregivers to aging parents.
  
That’s important.  And I’m going to keep fighting to make family leave and workplaceflexibility available to every American, no matter where they work.  It’s the right thing to do.
Every study shows that the kind of workplace flexibility we’re talking about isn’t just good forthe employees; ultimately, it ends up being good for the employers, because you get moreloyal, more productive employees with less turnover.  And it’s the right thing to do.  And withthe technologies that we have today, there’s no reason why we can’t make this happen.
So this year, we mark the 80th anniversary of Social Security.  We mark the 50th anniversaryof Medicare.  We’ve grown so accustomed to these programs being a part of American life --these bedrock, foundation stones of our society -- sometimes it’s easy to forget howrevolutionary they were at the time.  They were hard to get done.  When FDR tried to passSocial Security, critics called it “socialism.”  When President Kennedy and President Johnson --and the Dingells -- worked to create Medicare, cynics raised the alarm about governmenttakeover of health care.  And now we’ve got signs saying, “Get your government hands off ofmy Medicare.”
The point is change has always been hard.  Detractors always are trying to maximize people’sfear of the unknown.  But ultimately, hope triumphs over fear.  We choose to do big thingshere in America.  Like I said a couple weeks back -- three generations ago, we chose to endthe era where seniors were left to languish in poverty.  Two generations ago, we chose to endan age when Americans in their golden years didn’t have the guarantee of health care.  Thisgeneration, we chose to go even further, and now health care in America is more affordableand available than ever before.
In this anniversary of those incredible achievements, we need to recommit ourselves tofinishing the work that earlier generations began-- make sure this is a country that remainsone where no matter who you are or where you started off, you’re treated with dignity, yourhard work is rewarded, your contributions are valued, you have a shot to achieve your dreamswhatever your age.
That’s the America we’re all working for.  And I’m proud to work alongside you.  Thank you somuch.  Congratulations.  Have a wonderful conference.  Thank you.
