Ten days ago, the world watched in horror as men, women and children were massacred inSyria in the worst chemical weapons attack of the 21st century. Yesterday the United Statespresented a powerful case that the Syrian government was responsible for this attack on itsown people.
Our intelligence shows the Assad regime and its forces preparing to use chemical weapons,launching rockets in the highly populated suburbs of Damascus, and acknowledging that achemical weapons attack took place. And all of this corroborates what the world can plainlysee -- hospitals overflowing with victims; terrible images of the dead. All told, well over 1,000people were murdered. Several hundred of them were children -- young girls and boys gassedto death by their own government.
This attack is an assault on human dignity. It also presents a serious danger to our nationalsecurity. It risks making a mockery of the global prohibition on the use of chemical weapons.It endangers our friends and our partners along Syria's borders, including Israel, Jordan,Turkey, Lebanon and Iraq. It could lead to escalating use of chemical weapons, or theirproliferation to terrorist groups who would do our people harm.
In a world with many dangers, this menace must be confronted.
  
Now, after careful deliberation, I have decided that the United States should take militaryaction against Syrian regime targets. This would not be an open-ended intervention. Wewould not put boots on the ground. Instead, our action would be designed to be limited induration and scope. But I'm confident we can hold the Assad regime accountable for their useof chemical weapons, deter this kind of behavior, and degrade their capacity to carry it out.
Our military has positioned assets in the region. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs hasinformed me that we are prepared to strike whenever we choose. Moreover, the Chairman hasindicated to me that our capacity to execute this mission is not time-sensitive; it will beeffective tomorrow, or next week, or one month from now. And I'm prepared to give thatorder.
But having made my decision as Commander-in-Chief based on what I am convinced is ournational security interests, I'm also mindful that I'm the President of the world's oldestconstitutional democracy. I've long believed that our power is rooted not just in our militarymight, but in our example as a government of the people, by the people, and for the people.And that's why I've made a second decision: I will seek authorization for the use of force fromthe American people's representatives in Congress. 
Over the last several days, we've heard from members of Congress who want their voices tobe heard. I absolutely agree. So this morning, I spoke with all four congressional leaders, andthey've agreed to schedule a debate and then a vote as soon as Congress comes back intosession. 
In the coming days, my administration stands ready to provide every member with theinformation they need to understand what happened in Syria and why it has such profoundimplications for America's national security. And all of us should be accountable as we moveforward, and that can only be accomplished with a vote. 
I'm confident in the case our government has made without waiting for U.N. inspectors. I'mcomfortable going forward without the approval of a United Nations Security Council that, sofar, has been completely paralyzed and unwilling to hold Assad accountable. As aconsequence, many people have advised against taking this decision to Congress, andundoubtedly, they were impacted by what we saw happen in the United Kingdom this weekwhen the Parliament of our closest ally failed to pass a resolution with a similar goal, even asthe Prime Minister supported taking action.
Yet, while I believe I have the authority to carry out this military action without specificcongressional authorization, I know that the country will be stronger if we take this course,and our actions will be even more effective. We should have this debate, because the issuesare too big for business as usual. And this morning, John Boehner, Harry Reid, Nancy Pelosiand Mitch McConnell agreed that this is the right thing to do for our democracy. 
  
A country faces few decisions as grave as using military force, even when that force is limited.I respect the views of those who call for caution, particularly as our country emerges from atime of war that I was elected in part to end. But if we really do want to turn away fromtaking appropriate action in the face of such an unspeakable outrage, then we mustacknowledge the costs of doing nothing.
Here's my question for every member of Congress and every member of the globalcommunity: What message will we send if a dictator can gas hundreds of children to death inplain sight and pay no price? What's the purpose of the international system that we've built ifa prohibition on the use of chemical weapons that has been agreed to by the governments of98 percent of the world's people and approved overwhelmingly by the Congress of the UnitedStates is not enforced? 
Make no mistake -- this has implications beyond chemical warfare. If we won't enforceaccountability in the face of this heinous act, what does it say about our resolve to stand up toothers who flout fundamental international rules? To governments who would choose to buildnuclear arms? To terrorist who would spread biological weapons? To armies who carry outgenocide? 
We cannot raise our children in a world where we will not follow through on the things we say,the accords we sign, the values that define us. 
So just as I will take this case to Congress, I will also deliver this message to the world. Whilethe U.N. investigation has some time to report on its findings, we will insist that an atrocitycommitted with chemical weapons is not simply investigated, it must be confronted.
I don't expect every nation to agree with the decision we have made. Privately we've heardmany expressions of support from our friends. But I will ask those who care about the writ ofthe international community to stand publicly behind our action.
And finally, let me say this to the American people: I know well that we are weary of war.We've ended one war in Iraq. We're ending another in Afghanistan. And the American peoplehave the good sense to know we cannot resolve the underlying conflict in Syria with ourmilitary. In that part of the world, there are ancient sectarian differences, and the hopes ofthe Arab Spring have unleashed forces of change that are going to take many years toresolve. And that's why we're not contemplating putting our troops in the middle of someoneelse's war. 
Instead, we'll continue to support the Syrian people through our pressure on the Assadregime, our commitment to the opposition, our care for the displaced, and our pursuit of apolitical resolution that achieves a government that respects the dignity of its people.
  
But we are the United States of America, and we cannot and must not turn a blind eye towhat happened in Damascus. Out of the ashes of world war, we built an international orderand enforced the rules that gave it meaning. And we did so because we believe that the rightsof individuals to live in peace and dignity depends on the responsibilities of nations. We aren'tperfect, but this nation more than any other has been willing to meet those responsibilities.
So to all members of Congress of both parties, I ask you to take this vote for our nationalsecurity. I am looking forward to the debate. And in doing so, I ask you, members ofCongress, to consider that some things are more important than partisan differences or thepolitics of the moment. 
Ultimately, this is not about who occupies this office at any given time; it's about who we areas a country. I believe that the people's representatives must be invested in what Americadoes abroad, and now is the time to show the world that America keeps our commitments. Wedo what we say. And we lead with the belief that right makes might -- not the other wayaround.
We all know there are no easy options. But I wasn't elected to avoid hard decisions. Andneither were the members of the House and the Senate. I've told you what I believe, that oursecurity and our values demand that we cannot turn away from the massacre of countlesscivilians with chemical weapons. And our democracy is stronger when the President and thepeople's representatives stand together.
I'm ready to act in the face of this outrage. Today I'm asking Congress to send a message tothe world that we are ready to move forward together as one nation.
Thanks very much.
