Scripture teaches us,
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.1
Glen Doherty never shied from adventure. He believed that, in his life, he could make adifference -- a calling he fulfilled as a Navy SEAL. He served with distinction in Iraq andworked in Afghanistan. And there, in Benghazi, as he tended to others, he laid down his life,loyal as always, protecting his friends. Today, Glen is home.
Tyrone Woods devoted 20 years of his life to the SEALs -- the consummate "quietprofessional." At the Salty Frog Bar, they might not have known, but "Rone" also served inIraq and Afghanistan. And there, in Benghazi, he was far from Dorothy and Tyrone Jr., Hunterand little Kai. And he laid down his life, as he would have for them, protecting his friends. Andtoday, Rone is home. 
  
Sean Smith, it seems, lived to serve -- first, in the Air Force, then, with you at the StateDepartment. He knew the perils of this calling from his time in Baghdad. And there, inBenghazi, far from home, he surely thought of Heather and Samantha and Nathan. And helaid down his life in service to us all. Today, Sean is home.
Chris Stevens was everything America could want in an ambassador, as the whole country hascome to see -- how he first went to the region as a young man in the Peace Corps, how duringthe revolution, he arrived in Libya on that cargo ship, how he believed in Libya and its peopleand how they loved him back. And there, in Benghazi, he laid down his life for his friends --Libyan and American -- and for us all.  Today, Chris is home.
Four Americans, four patriots -- they loved this country and they chose to serve it, and servedit well. They had a mission and they believed in it. They knew the danger and they acceptedit. They didn’t simply embrace the American ideal, they lived it.  They embodied it -- thecourage, the hope and, yes, the idealism, that fundamental American belief that we can leavethis world a little better than before. That’s who they were and that’s who we are. And if wewant to truly honor their memory, that’s who we must always be.
I know that this awful loss, the terrible images of recent days, the pictures we’re seeing againtoday, have caused some to question this work. And there is no doubt these are difficultdays. In moments such as this -- so much anger and violence --even the most hopeful amongus must wonder.
But amid all of the images of this week, I also think of the Libyans who took to the streetswith homemade signs expressing their gratitude to an American who believed in what wecould achieve together. I think of the man in Benghazi with his sign in English, a message hewanted all of us to hear that said, "Chris Stevens was a friend to all Libyans. Chris Stevenswas a friend."
That’s the message these four patriots sent. That’s the message that each of you sends everyday -- civilians, military -- to people in every corner of the world, that America is a friend, andthat we care not just about our own country, not just about our own interests, but abouttheirs; that even as voices of suspicion and mistrust seek to divide countries and culturesfrom one another, the United States of America will never retreat from the world. We willnever stop working for the dignity and freedom that every person deserves, whatever theircreed, whatever their faith.
That’s the essence of American leadership. That’s the spirit that sets us apart from othernations. This was their work in Benghazi, and this is the work we will carry on.
To you -- their families and colleagues -- to all Americans, know this: Their sacrifice will neverbe forgotten. We will bring to justice those who took them from us. We will stand fast againstthe violence on our diplomatic missions.
  
We will continue to do everything in our power to protect Americans serving overseas,whether that means increasing security at our diplomatic posts, working with host countries,which have an obligation to provide security, and making it clear that justice will come tothose who harm Americans.
Most of all, even in our grief, we will be resolute. For we are Americans, and we hold our headhigh knowing that because of these patriots -- because of you -- this country that we love willalways shine as a light unto the world.
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.
The flag they served under now carries them home.
May God bless the memory of these men who laid down their lives for us all.
May God watch over your families and all who loved them
And may God bless these United States of America.
1
John: 15:13
