It is wonderful to be back at GW.  I want you to know that one of the reasons that I workedso hard with Democrats and Republicans to keep the government open was so that I couldshow up here today.  I wanted to make sure that all of you had one more excuse to skipclass. You’re welcome.
I want to give a special thanks to Steven Knapp, the president of GW.  I just saw him --where is he?  There he is right there.
We've got a lot of distinguished guests here -- a couple of people I want to acknowledge. First of all, my outstanding Vice President, Joe Biden, is here.   Our Secretary of the Treasury,Tim Geithner, is in the house.  Jack Lew, the Director of the Office of Mangement and Budget. Gene Sperling, Chair of the National Economic Council, is here.  Members of our bipartisanFiscal Commission are here, including the two outstanding chairs -- Erskine Bowles and AlanSimpson -- are here.
And we have a number of members of Congress here today.  I'm grateful for all of you takingthe time to attend. 
  
What we’ve been debating here in Washington over the last few weeks will affect the lives ofthe students here and families all across America in potentially profound ways.  This debateover budgets and deficits is about more than just numbers on a page; it’s about more thanjust cutting and spending.  It’s about the kind of future that we want.  It’s about the kind ofcountry that we believe in.  And that’s what I want to spend some time talking about today. 
From our first days as a nation, we have put our faith in free markets and free enterprise asthe engine of America’s wealth and prosperity.  More than citizens of any other country, weare rugged individualists, a self-reliant people with a healthy skepticism of too muchgovernment. 
But there’s always been another thread running through our history -– a belief that we’re allconnected, and that there are some things we can only do together, as a nation.  We believe,in the words of our first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, that through government, weshould do together what we cannot do as well for ourselves. 
And so we’ve built a strong military to keep us secure, and public schools and universities toeducate our citizens.  We’ve laid down railroads and highways to facilitate travel andcommerce.  We’ve supported the work of scientists and researchers whose discoveries havesaved lives, unleashed repeated technological revolutions, and led to countless new jobs andentire new industries.  Each of us has benefitted from these investments, and we’re a moreprosperous country as a result.     Part of this American belief that we’re all connected also expresses itself in a conviction thateach one of us deserves some basic measure of security and dignity.  We recognize that nomatter how responsibly we live our lives, hard times or bad luck, a crippling illness or a layoffmay strike any one of us.  “There but for the grace of God go I,” we say to ourselves.  And sowe contribute to programs like Medicare and Social Security, which guarantee us health careand a measure of basic income after a lifetime of hard work; unemployment insurance, whichprotects us against unexpected job loss; and Medicaid, which provides care for millions ofseniors in nursing homes, poor children, those with disabilities.  We’re a better countrybecause of these commitments.  I’ll go further.  We would not be a great country withoutthose commitments.        
Now, for much of the last century, our nation found a way to afford these investments andpriorities with the taxes paid by its citizens.  As a country that values fairness, wealthierindividuals have traditionally borne a greater share of this burden than the middle class orthose less fortunate.  Everybody pays, but the wealthier have borne a little more.  This is notbecause we begrudge those who’ve done well -– we rightly celebrate their success.  Instead,it’s a basic reflection of our belief that those who’ve benefited most from our way of life canafford to give back a little bit more.  Moreover, this belief hasn’t hindered the success of thoseat the top of the income scale.  They continue to do better and better with each passing year.
  
Now, at certain times -– particularly during war or recession -– our nation has had to borrowmoney to pay for some of our priorities.  And as most families understand, a little credit carddebt isn’t going to hurt if it’s temporary.
But as far back as the 1980s, America started amassing debt at more alarming levels, and ourleaders began to realize that a larger challenge was on the horizon.  They knew thateventually, the Baby Boom generation would retire, which meant a much bigger portion of ourcitizens would be relying on programs like Medicare, Social Security, and possibly Medicaid. Like parents with young children who know they have to start saving for the college years,America had to start borrowing less and saving more to prepare for the retirement of an entiregeneration. 
To meet this challenge, our leaders came together three times during the 1990s to reduce ournation’s deficit -- three times.  They forged historic agreements that required tough decisionsmade by the first President Bush, then made by President Clinton, by Democratic Congressesand by a Republican Congress.  All three agreements asked for shared responsibility andshared sacrifice.  But they largely protected the middle class; they largely protected ourcommitment to seniors; they protected our key investments in our future. 
As a result of these bipartisan efforts, America’s finances were in great shape by the year2000.  We went from deficit to surplus.  America was actually on track to becomingcompletely debt free, and we were prepared for the retirement of the Baby Boomers. 
But after Democrats and Republicans committed to fiscal discipline during the 1990s, we lostour way in the decade that followed.  We increased spending dramatically for two wars and anexpensive prescription drug program -– but we didn’t pay for any of this new spending. Instead, we made the problem worse with trillions of dollars in unpaid-for tax cuts -– tax cutsthat went to every millionaire and billionaire in the country; tax cuts that will force us toborrow an average of $500 billion every year over the next decade. 
To give you an idea of how much damage this caused to our nation’s checkbook, considerthis:  In the last decade, if we had simply found a way to pay for the tax cuts and theprescription drug benefit, our deficit would currently be at low historical levels in the comingyears. 
But that’s not what happened.  And so, by the time I took office, we once again foundourselves deeply in debt and unprepared for a Baby Boom retirement that is now starting totake place.  When I took office, our projected deficit, annually, was more than $1 trillion.  Ontop of that, we faced a terrible financial crisis and a recession that, like most recessions, ledus to temporarily borrow even more. 
In this case, we took a series of emergency steps that saved millions of jobs, kept creditflowing, and provided working families extra money in their pocket.  It was absolutely theright thing to do, but these steps were expensive, and added to our deficits in the short term.
  
So that’s how our fiscal challenge was created.  That’s how we got here.  And now that oureconomic recovery is gaining strength, Democrats and Republicans must come together andrestore the fiscal responsibility that served us so well in the 1990s.  We have to live within ourmeans.  We have to reduce our deficit, and we have to get back on a path that will allow us topay down our debt.  And we have to do it in a way that protects the recovery, protects theinvestments we need to grow, create jobs, and helps us win the future.
Now, before I get into how we can achieve this goal, some of you, particularly the youngerpeople here -- you don't qualify, Joe.  Some of you might be wondering, “Why is this soimportant?  Why does this matter to me?”
Well, here’s why.  Even after our economy recovers, our government will still be on track tospend more money than it takes in throughout this decade and beyond.  That means we’llhave to keep borrowing more from countries like China.  That means more of your tax dollarseach year will go towards paying off the interest on all the loans that we keep taking out.  Bythe end of this decade, the interest that we owe on our debt could rise to nearly $1 trillion. Think about that.  That's the interest -- just the interest payments.  
Then, as the Baby Boomers start to retire in greater numbers and health care costs continueto rise, the situation will get even worse.  By 2025, the amount of taxes we currently pay willonly be enough to finance our health care programs -- Medicare and Medicaid -- SocialSecurity, and the interest we owe on our debt.  That’s it.  Every other national priority -–education, transportation, even our national security -– will have to be paid for with borrowedmoney.
Now, ultimately, all this rising debt will cost us jobs and damage our economy.  It will preventus from making the investments we need to win the future.  We won’t be able to afford goodschools, new research, or the repair of roads -– all the things that create new jobs andbusinesses here in America.  Businesses will be less likely to invest and open shop in acountry that seems unwilling or unable to balance its books.  And if our creditors startworrying that we may be unable to pay back our debts, that could drive up interest rates foreverybody who borrows money -– making it harder for businesses to expand and hire, orfamilies to take out a mortgage. 
Here’s the good news:  That doesn’t have to be our future.  That doesn’t have to be thecountry that we leave our children.  We can solve this problem.  We came together asDemocrats and Republicans to meet this challenge before; we can do it again. 
But that starts by being honest about what’s causing our deficit.  You see, most Americanstend to dislike government spending in the abstract, but like the stuff that it buys.  Most of us,regardless of party affiliation, believe that we should have a strong military and a strongdefense.
  
Most Americans believe we should invest in education and medical research.  Most Americansthink we should protect commitments like Social Security and Medicare.  And without evenlooking at a poll, my finely honed political instincts tell me that almost nobody believes theyshould be paying higher taxes. 
So because all this spending is popular with both Republicans and Democrats alike, andbecause nobody wants to pay higher taxes, politicians are often eager to feed the impressionthat solving the problem is just a matter of eliminating waste and abuse.  You’ll hear thatphrase a lot.  “We just need to eliminate waste and abuse.”  The implication is that tacklingthe deficit issue won’t require tough choices.  Or politicians suggest that we can somehowclose our entire deficit by eliminating things like foreign aid, even though foreign aid makes upabout 1 percent of our entire federal budget. 
So here’s the truth.  Around two-thirds of our budget -- two-thirds -- is spent on Medicare,Medicaid, Social Security, and national security.  Two-thirds.  Programs like unemploymentinsurance, student loans, veterans’ benefits, and tax credits for working families take upanother 20 percent.  What’s left, after interest on the debt, is just 12 percent for everythingelse.  That’s 12 percent for all of our national priorities -- education, clean energy, medicalresearch, transportation, our national parks, food safety, keeping our air and water clean --you name it -- all of that accounts for 12 percent of our budget.
Now, up till now, the debate here in Washington, the cuts proposed by a lot of folks inWashington, have focused exclusively on that 12 percent.  But cuts to that 12 percent alonewon’t solve the problem.  So any serious plan to tackle our deficit will require us to puteverything on the table, and take on excess spending wherever it exists in the budget. 
A serious plan doesn’t require us to balance our budget overnight –- in fact, economists thinkthat with the economy just starting to grow again, we need a phased-in approach –- but itdoes require tough decisions and support from our leaders in both parties now.  Above all, itwill require us to choose a vision of the America we want to see five years, 10 years, 20 yearsdown the road. 
Now, to their credit, one vision has been presented and championed by Republicans in theHouse of Representatives and embraced by several of their party’s presidential candidates. It’s a plan that aims to reduce our deficit by $4 trillion over the next 10 years, and one thataddresses the challenge of Medicare and Medicaid in the years after that. 
These are both worthy goals.  They’re worthy goals for us to achieve.  But the way this planachieves those goals would lead to a fundamentally different America than the one we’veknown certainly in my lifetime.  In fact, I think it would be fundamentally different than whatwe’ve known throughout our history. 
A 70 percent cut in clean energy.  A 25 percent cut in education.  A 30 percent cut intransportation.  Cuts in college Pell Grants that will grow to more than $1,000 per year. 
  
That’s the proposal.  These aren’t the kind of cuts you make when you’re trying to get rid ofsome waste or find extra savings in the budget.  These aren’t the kinds of cuts that the FiscalCommission proposed.  These are the kinds of cuts that tell us we can’t afford the Americathat I believe in and I think you believe in. 
I believe it paints a vision of our future that is deeply pessimistic.  It’s a vision that says if ourroads crumble and our bridges collapse, we can’t afford to fix them.  If there are bright youngAmericans who have the drive and the will but not the money to go to college, we can’t affordto send them. 
Go to China and you’ll see businesses opening research labs and solar facilities.  South Koreanchildren are outpacing our kids in math and science.  They’re scrambling to figure out howthey put more money into education.  Brazil is investing billions in new infrastructure and canrun half their cars not on high-priced gasoline, but on biofuels.  And yet, we are presentedwith a vision that says the American people, the United States of America -– the greatestnation on Earth -– can’t afford any of this. 
It’s a vision that says America can’t afford to keep the promise we’ve made to care for ourseniors.  It says that 10 years from now, if you’re a 65-year-old who’s eligible for Medicare,you should have to pay nearly $6,400 more than you would today.  It says instead ofguaranteed health care, you will get a voucher.  And if that voucher isn’t worth enough to buythe insurance that’s available in the open marketplace, well, tough luck -– you’re on yourown.  Put simply, it ends Medicare as we know it. 
It’s a vision that says up to 50 million Americans have to lose their health insurance in orderfor us to reduce the deficit.  Who are these 50 million Americans?  Many are somebody’sgrandparents -- may be one of yours -- who wouldn’t be able to afford nursing home carewithout Medicaid.  Many are poor children.  Some are middle-class families who have childrenwith autism or Down’s syndrome.  Some of these kids with disabilities are -- the disabilitiesare so severe that they require 24-hour care.  These are the Americans we’d be telling to fendfor themselves.       
And worst of all, this is a vision that says even though Americans can’t afford to invest ineducation at current levels, or clean energy, even though we can’t afford to maintain ourcommitment on Medicare and Medicaid, we can somehow afford more than $1 trillion in newtax breaks for the wealthy.  Think about that.
In the last decade, the average income of the bottom 90 percent of all working Americansactually declined.  Meanwhile, the top 1 percent saw their income rise by an average of morethan a quarter of a million dollars each.  That’s who needs to pay less taxes?
They want to give people like me a $200,000 tax cut that’s paid for by asking 33 seniors eachto pay $6,000 more in health costs.  That’s not right.  And it’s not going to happen as long asI’m President. 
  
This vision is less about reducing the deficit than it is about changing the basic social compactin America.  Ronald Reagan’s own budget director said, there’s nothing “serious” or“courageous” about this plan.  There’s nothing serious about a plan that claims to reduce thedeficit by spending a trillion dollars on tax cuts for millionaires and billionaires.  And I don'tthink there’s anything courageous about asking for sacrifice from those who can least afford itand don’t have any clout on Capitol Hill.  That's not a vision of the America I know. 
The America I know is generous and compassionate.  It’s a land of opportunity and optimism. Yes, we take responsibility for ourselves, but we also take responsibility for each other; for thecountry we want and the future that we share.  We’re a nation that built a railroad across acontinent and brought light to communities shrouded in darkness.  We sent a generation tocollege on the GI Bill and we saved millions of seniors from poverty with Social Security andMedicare.  We have led the world in scientific research and technological breakthroughs thathave transformed millions of lives.  That’s who we are.  This is the America that I know.  Wedon’t have to choose between a future of spiraling debt and one where we forfeit ourinvestment in our people and our country. 
To meet our fiscal challenge, we will need to make reforms. We will all need to makesacrifices.  But we do not have to sacrifice the America we believe in.  And as long as I’mPresident, we won’t.
So today, I’m proposing a more balanced approach to achieve $4 trillion in deficit reductionover 12 years.  It’s an approach that borrows from the recommendations of the bipartisanFiscal Commission that I appointed last year, and it builds on the roughly $1 trillion in deficitreduction I already proposed in my 2012 budget.  It’s an approach that puts every kind ofspending on the table -- but one that protects the middle class, our promise to seniors, andour investments in the future. 
The first step in our approach is to keep annual domestic spending low by building on thesavings that both parties agreed to last week.  That step alone will save us about $750 billionover 12 years.  We will make the tough cuts necessary to achieve these savings, including inprograms that I care deeply about, but I will not sacrifice the core investments that we needto grow and create jobs.  We will invest in medical research.  We will invest in clean energytechnology.  We will invest in new roads and airports and broadband access.  We will invest ineducation.  We will invest in job training.  We will do what we need to do to compete, and wewill win the future.
The second step in our approach is to find additional savings in our defense budget.  Now, asCommander-in-Chief, I have no greater responsibility than protecting our national security,and I will never accept cuts that compromise our ability to defend our homeland or America’sinterests around the world.  But as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Admiral Mullen, has said,the greatest long-term threat to America’s national security is America’s debt.  So just as wemust find more savings in domestic programs, we must do the same in defense.  And we cando that while still keeping ourselves safe. 
  
Over the last two years, Secretary Bob Gates has courageously taken on wasteful spending,saving $400 billion in current and future spending.  I believe we can do that again.  We needto not only eliminate waste and improve efficiency and effectiveness, but we’re going to haveto conduct a fundamental review of America’s missions, capabilities, and our role in achanging world.  I intend to work with Secretary Gates and the Joint Chiefs on this review,and I will make specific decisions about spending after it’s complete.     
The third step in our approach is to further reduce health care spending in our budget.  Now,here, the difference with the House Republican plan could not be clearer.  Their planessentially lowers the government’s health care bills by asking seniors and poor families topay them instead.  Our approach lowers the government’s health care bills by reducing thecost of health care itself. 
Already, the reforms we passed in the health care law will reduce our deficit by $1 trillion.  Myapproach would build on these reforms.  We will reduce wasteful subsidies and erroneouspayments.  We will cut spending on prescription drugs by using Medicare’s purchasing powerto drive greater efficiency and speed generic brands of medicine onto the market.  We willwork with governors of both parties to demand more efficiency and accountability fromMedicaid. 
We will change the way we pay for health care -– not by the procedure or the number of daysspent in a hospital, but with new incentives for doctors and hospitals to prevent injuries andimprove results.  And we will slow the growth of Medicare costs by strengthening anindependent commission of doctors, nurses, medical experts and consumers who will look atall the evidence and recommend the best ways to reduce unnecessary spending whileprotecting access to the services that seniors need.  
Now, we believe the reforms we’ve proposed to strengthen Medicare and Medicaid will enableus to keep these commitments to our citizens while saving us $500 billion by 2023, and anadditional $1 trillion in the decade after that.  But if we’re wrong, and Medicare costs risefaster than we expect, then this approach will give the independent commission the authorityto make additional savings by further improving Medicare.  
But let me be absolutely clear:  I will preserve these health care programs as a promise wemake to each other in this society.  I will not allow Medicare to become a voucher programthat leaves seniors at the mercy of the insurance industry, with a shrinking benefit to pay forrising costs.  I will not tell families with children who have disabilities that they have to fendfor themselves.  We will reform these programs, but we will not abandon the fundamentalcommitment this country has kept for generations. 
That includes, by the way, our commitment to Social Security.  While Social Security is not thecause of our deficit, it faces real long-term challenges in a country that’s growing older.  As Isaid in the State of the Union, both parties should work together now to strengthen SocialSecurity for future generations.
  
But we have to do it without putting at risk current retirees, or the most vulnerable, or peoplewith disabilities; without slashing benefits for future generations; and without subjectingAmericans’ guaranteed retirement income to the whims of the stock market.  And it can bedone.
The fourth step in our approach is to reduce spending in the tax code, so-called taxexpenditures.  In December, I agreed to extend the tax cuts for the wealthiest Americansbecause it was the only way I could prevent a tax hike on middle-class Americans.  But wecannot afford $1 trillion worth of tax cuts for every millionaire and billionaire in our society. We can’t afford it.  And I refuse to renew them again. 
Beyond that, the tax code is also loaded up with spending on things like itemized deductions. And while I agree with the goals of many of these deductions, from homeownership tocharitable giving, we can’t ignore the fact that they provide millionaires an average tax breakof $75,000 but do nothing for the typical middle-class family that doesn’t itemize.  So mybudget calls for limiting itemized deductions for the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans -- areform that would reduce the deficit by $320 billion over 10 years. 
But to reduce the deficit, I believe we should go further.  And that’s why I’m calling onCongress to reform our individual tax code so that it is fair and simple -- so that the amountof taxes you pay isn’t determined by what kind of accountant you can afford.
I believe reform should protect the middle class, promote economic growth, and build on thefiscal commission’s model of reducing tax expenditures so that there’s enough savings to bothlower rates and lower the deficit.  And as I called for in the State of the Union, we shouldreform our corporate tax code as well, to make our businesses and our economy morecompetitive.  
So this is my approach to reduce the deficit by $4 trillion over the next 12 years.  It’s anapproach that achieves about $2 trillion in spending cuts across the budget.  It will lower ourinterest payments on the debt by $1 trillion.  It calls for tax reform to cut about $1 trillion intax expenditures -- spending in the tax code.  And it achieves these goals while protecting themiddle class, protecting our commitment to seniors, and protecting our investments in thefuture. 
Now, in the coming years, if the recovery speeds up and our economy grows faster than ourcurrent projections, we can make even greater progress than I’ve pledged here.  But just tohold Washington -- and to hold me --- accountable and make sure that the debt burdencontinues to decline, my plan includes a debt failsafe.  If, by 2014, our debt is not projectedto fall as a share of the economy -– if we haven’t hit our targets, if Congress has failed to act-– then my plan will require us to come together and make up the additional savings withmore spending cuts and more spending reductions in the tax code.  That should be anincentive for us to act boldly now, instead of kicking our problems further down the road.  
  
So this is our vision for America -– this is my vision for America -- a vision where we livewithin our means while still investing in our future; where everyone makes sacrifices but noone bears all the burden; where we provide a basic measure of security for our citizens andwe provide rising opportunity for our children.  
There will be those who vigorously disagree with my approach.  I can guarantee that as well. Some will argue we should not even consider ever -- ever -- raising taxes, even if only on thewealthiest Americans.  It’s just an article of faith to them.  I say that at a time when the taxburden on the wealthy is at its lowest level in half a century, the most fortunate among us canafford to pay a little more.  I don’t need another tax cut.  Warren Buffett doesn’t need anothertax cut.  Not if we have to pay for it by making seniors pay more for Medicare.  Or by cuttingkids from Head Start.  Or by taking away college scholarships that I wouldn’t be here withoutand that some of you would not be here without. 
And here’s the thing:  I believe that most wealthy Americans would agree with me.  Theywant to give back to their country, a country that’s done so much for them.  It’s justWashington hasn’t asked them to. 
Others will say that we shouldn’t even talk about cutting spending until the economy is fullyrecovered.  These are mostly folks in my party.  I’m sympathetic to this view -- which is oneof the reasons I supported the payroll tax cuts we passed in December.  It’s also why we haveto use a scalpel and not a machete to reduce the deficit, so that we can keep making theinvestments that create jobs.  But doing nothing on the deficit is just not an option.  Our debthas grown so large that we could do real damage to the economy if we don’t begin a processnow to get our fiscal house in order.  
Finally, there are those who believe we shouldn’t make any reforms to Medicare, Medicaid, orSocial Security, out of fear that any talk of change to these programs will immediately usherin the sort of steps that the House Republicans have proposed.  And I understand those fears. But I guarantee that if we don’t make any changes at all, we won’t be able to keep ourcommitment to a retiring generation that will live longer and will face higher health care coststhan those who came before. 
Indeed, to those in my own party, I say that if we truly believe in a progressive vision of oursociety, we have an obligation to prove that we can afford our commitments.  If we believethe government can make a difference in people’s lives, we have the obligation to prove thatit works -– by making government smarter, and leaner and more effective. 
Of course, there are those who simply say there’s no way we can come together at all andagree on a solution to this challenge.  They’ll say the politics of this city are just too broken;the choices are just too hard; the parties are just too far apart.  And after a few years on thisjob, I have some sympathy for this view.  
  
But I also know that we’ve come together before and met big challenges.  Ronald Reagan andTip O’Neill came together to save Social Security for future generations.  The first PresidentBush and a Democratic Congress came together to reduce the deficit.  President Clinton and aRepublican Congress battled each other ferociously, disagreed on just about everything, butthey still found a way to balance the budget.  And in the last few months, both parties havecome together to pass historic tax relief and spending cuts. 
And I know there are Republicans and Democrats in Congress who want to see a balancedapproach to deficit reduction.  And even those Republicans I disagree with most strongly Ibelieve are sincere about wanting to do right by their country.  We may disagree on ourvisions, but I truly believe they want to do the right thing.
So I believe we can, and must, come together again.  This morning, I met with Democraticand Republican leaders in Congress to discuss the approach that I laid out today.  And in earlyMay, the Vice President will begin regular meetings with leaders in both parties with the aim ofreaching a final agreement on a plan to reduce the deficit and get it done by the end of June. 
I don’t expect the details in any final agreement to look exactly like the approach I laid outtoday.  This a democracy; that’s not how things work.  I’m eager to hear other ideas from allends of the political spectrum.  And though I’m sure the criticism of what I’ve said here todaywill be fierce in some quarters, and my critique of the House Republican approach has beenstrong, Americans deserve and will demand that we all make an effort to bridge ourdifferences and find common ground. 
This larger debate that we’re having -- this larger debate about the size and the role ofgovernment -- it has been with us since our founding days.  And during moments of greatchallenge and change, like the one that we’re living through now, the debate gets sharper andit gets more vigorous.  That’s not a bad thing.  In fact, it’s a good thing.  As a country thatprizes both our individual freedom and our obligations to one another, this is one of the mostimportant debates that we can have. 
But no matter what we argue, no matter where we stand, we’ve always held certain beliefs asAmericans.  We believe that in order to preserve our own freedoms and pursue our ownhappiness, we can’t just think about ourselves.  We have to think about the country thatmade these liberties possible.  We have to think about our fellow citizens with whom we sharea community.  And we have to think about what’s required to preserve the American Dreamfor future generations. 
This sense of responsibility -- to each other and to our country -- this isn’t a partisan feeling. It isn’t a Democratic or a Republican idea.  It’s patriotism.
The other day I received a letter from a man in Florida.  He started off by telling me he didn’tvote for me and he hasn’t always agreed with me.
  
But even though he’s worried about our economy and the state of our politics -- here’s whathe said -- he said, “I still believe.  I believe in that great country that my grandfather told meabout.  I believe that somewhere lost in this quagmire of petty bickering on every newsstation, the ‘American Dream’ is still alive…We need to use our dollars here rebuilding,refurbishing and restoring all that our ancestors struggled to create and maintain… We as apeople must do this together, no matter the color of the state one comes from or the side ofthe aisle one might sit on.”
“I still believe.”  I still believe as well.  And I know that if we can come together and upholdour responsibilities to one another and to this larger enterprise that is America, we will keepthe dream of our founding alive -- in our time; and we will pass it on to our children.  We willpass on to our children a country that we believe in. 
Thank you.  God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.
