Hello, Fort Campbell! 101st Airborne Division -- Air Assault, hello!
General Colt, thank you for that great introduction -- it was great because it was brief. Moreimportantly, thank you for the extraordinary leadership that you’ve shown here at one of thelargest Army bases in America.
And let me just say, I make a lot of decisions; one of the earliest and best decisions I madewas choosing one of the finest Vice Presidents in our history -- Joe Biden, right here.
Chaplain Miller, thank you for the beautiful invocation.
I want to thank General Colt for welcoming me here today, along with your great CommandSergeant Major, Wayne St. Louis. The Quartet and 101st Division Band. All these troopersbehind me -- you look great. You noticed they kind of hesitated.
We got a lot of folks in the house. We’ve got military police and medical personnel. We’ve gotthe Green Berets of the 5th Special Forces Group. I think we’ve got a few Air Force here. Oh -
- Well, we thought we did. There they go -- okay. Come on. And, of course, the legendaryScreaming Eagles. And although they’re not in the audience, I want to acknowledge the 160thSpecial Operations Aviation Regiment -- the Night Stalkers -- for their extraordinary service.
Now, I’ve got to say, some of you are starting to look a little familiar -- because lastDecember, when we were at Bagram, I was out there to thank you for your service, especiallyduring the holidays. And we had a great rally, a big crowd -- it seemed like everybody wasthere from the 101st.
  
And since then, I know we’ve had quite a few homecomings. The Rakkasans. Destiny. Strike.Bastogne. And some of the Division Headquarters -- the Gladiators. On behalf of a gratefulnation -- welcome home.
Of course, our thoughts and prayers are with General Campbell, Command Sergeant MajorSchroeder, and all of the Screaming Eagles and troops that are still risking their lives intheater. And I’m so pleased that Ann Campbell and Marla Schroeder, and some of theinspiring military spouses are here. Where are they at? Right over there. We are grateful toyou. God bless you. There they are. Thank you so much. This happens to be Military SpouseAppreciation Day. And we honor your service as well.
Now, I didn’t come here to make a really long speech. I know you're hearing that. It’s like,yeah, it’s hot! What I really wanted to do was come down and shake some hands. I came herefor a simple reason -- to say thank you on behalf of America. This has been an historic weekin the life of our nation. Thanks to the incredible skill and courage of countless individuals --intelligence, military -- over many years, the terrorist leader who struck our nation on 9/11will never threaten America again.
Yesterday, I traveled to New York City, and, along with some of our 9/11 families, laid awreath at Ground Zero in memory of their loved ones. I met with the first responders -- thefirefighters, the police officers, the Port Authority officers -- who lost so many of their ownwhen they rushed into those burning towers. I promised that our nation will never forgetthose we lost that dark September day. 
And today, here at Fort Campbell, I had the privilege of meeting the extraordinary Special Opsfolks who honored that promise. It was a chance for me to say -- on behalf of all Americansand people around the world -- “Job well done.” Job well done.
They’re America’s “quiet professionals” -- because success demands secrecy. But I will saythis. Like all of you, they could have chosen a life of ease. But like you, they volunteered.They chose to serve in a time of war, knowing they could be sent into harm’s way. Theytrained for years. They’re battle-hardened. They practiced tirelessly for this mission. Andwhen I gave the order, they were ready.
Now, in recent days, the whole world has learned just how ready they were. These Americansdeserve credit for one of the greatest intelligence military operations in our nation’s history.But so does every person who wears America’s uniform, the finest military the world has everknown. And that includes all of you men and women of 101st.
You have been on the frontlines of this fight for nearly 10 years. You were there in those earlydays, driving the Taliban from power, pushing al Qaeda out of its safe havens. Over time, asthe insurgency grew, you went back for, in some cases, a second time, a third time, a fourthtime.
  
When the decision was made to go into Iraq, you were there, too, making the longest airassault in history, defeating a vicious insurgency, ultimately giving Iraqis the chance to securetheir democracy. And you’ve been at the forefront of our new strategy in Afghanistan.
Sending you -- more of you -- into harm’s way is the toughest decision that I’ve made asCommander-in-Chief. I don’t make it lightly. Every time I visit Walter Reed, every time I visitBethesda, I’m reminded of the wages of war. But I made that decision because I know thatthis mission was vital to the security of the nation that we all love.
And I know it hasn’t been easy for you and it hasn’t, certainly, been easy for your families.Since 9/11, no base has deployed more often, and few bases have sacrificed more than you.We see it in our heroic wounded warriors, fighting every day to recover, and who deserve theabsolute best care in the world. We see it in the mental and emotional toll that’s been taken --in some cases, some good people, good soldiers who’ve taken their own lives. So we’re goingto keep saying to anybody who is hurting out there, don’t give up. You’re not alone. Yourcountry needs you. We’re here for you to keep you strong.
And most of all, we see the price of this war in the 125 soldiers from Fort Campbell who’vemade the ultimate sacrifice during this deployment to Afghanistan. And every memorialceremony -- every “Eagle Remembrance” -- is a solemn reminder of the heavy burdens ofwar, but also the values of loyalty and duty and honor that have defined your lives.
So here’s what each of you must know. Because of your service, because of your sacrifices,we’re making progress in Afghanistan. In some of the toughest parts of the country, GeneralCampbell and the 101st are taking insurgents and their leaders off the battlefield and helpingAfghans reclaim their communities.
Across Afghanistan, we’ve broken the Taliban’s momentum. In key regions, we’ve seized themomentum, pushing them out of their strongholds. We’re building the capacity of Afghans,partnering with communities and police and security forces, which are growing stronger.
And most of all, we’re making progress in our major goal, our central goal in Pakistan andAfghanistan, and that is disrupting and dismantling -- and we are going to ultimately defeat alQaeda. We have cut off their head and we will ultimately defeat them.
Even before this week’s operation, we’ve put al Qaeda’s leadership under more pressure thanat any time since 9/11, on both sides of the border. So the bottom line is this: Our strategy isworking, and there’s no greater evidence of that than justice finally being delivered to Osamabin Laden.
  
But I don’t want to fool you. This continues to be a very tough fight. You know that. Butbecause of this progress, we’re moving into a new phase. In the coming months, we’ll starttransferring responsibility for security to Afghan forces. Starting this summer, we’ll beginreducing American forces. As we transition, we’ll build a long-term partnership with theAfghan people, so that al Qaeda can never again threaten America from that country.
And, as your Commander-in-Chief, I’m confident that we’re going to succeed in this mission.The reason I’m confident is because in you I see the strength of America’s military -- andbecause in recent days we’ve all seen the resilience of the American spirit.
Now, this week I received a letter from a girl in New Jersey named Payton Wall. She wrote tome on Monday after the news that bin Laden had been killed, and she explained how she stillremembers that September morning almost 10 years ago. She was only four years old. Herfather, Glen, was trapped inside the World Trade Center. And so, in those final, franticmoments, knowing he might not make it, he called home. And Payton remembers watchingher mom sobbing as she spoke to her husband and then passed the phone to Payton. And inwords that were hard to hear but which she’s never forgotten, he said to her, “I love youPayton, and I will always be watching over you.” 
So yesterday, Payton, her mom, and her sister, Avery, joined me at Ground Zero. And nowPayton is 14. These past 10 years have been tough for her. In her letter, she said, “Ever sincemy father died, I lost a part of me that can never be replaced.” And she describes herchildhood as a “little girl struggling to shine through all the darkness in her life.”
But every year, more and more, Payton is shining through. She’s playing a lot of sports,including lacrosse and track, just like her dad. She’s doing well in school. She’s mentoringyounger students. She’s looking ahead to high school in the fall. And so, yesterday she waswith us -- a strong, confident young woman -- honoring her father’s memory, even as she sether sights on the future.
And for her and for all of us, this week has been a reminder of what we’re about as a people.It’s easy to forget sometimes, especially in times of hardship, times of uncertainty. We’recoming out of the worst recession since the Great Depression; haven’t fully recovered fromthat. We’ve made enormous sacrifices in two wars. But the essence of America -- the valuesthat have defined us for more than 200 years -- they don’t just endure; they are strongerthan ever.
We’re still the America that does the hard things, that does the great things. We’re the nationthat always dared to dream. We’re the nation that’s willing to take risks -- revolutionariesbreaking free from an empire; pioneers heading West to settle new frontiers; innovatorsbuilding railways and laying the highways and putting a man on the surface of the moon.
  
We are the nation -- and you’re the Division -- that parachuted behind enemy lines on D-Day,freeing a continent, liberating concentration camps. We’re the nation that, all those years ago,sent your Division to a high school in Arkansas so that nine black students could get aneducation. That was you. Because we believed that all men are created equal; that everyonedeserves a chance to realize their God-given potential.
We’re the nation that has faced tough times before -- tougher times than these. But when ourUnion frayed, when the Depression came, when our harbor was bombed, when our countrywas attacked on that September day, when disaster strikes like that tornado that just rippedthrough this region, we do not falter. We don’t turn back. We pick ourselves up and we get onwith the hard task of keeping our country strong and safe.
See, there’s nothing we can’t do together, 101st, when we remember who we are, at that isthe United States of America. When we remember that, no problem is too hard and nochallenge is too great.
And that is why I am so confident that, with your brave service, America’s greatest days arestill to come.
God bless you.
