Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, fellow delegates, ladies and gentleman:  I would like tobegin today by telling you about an American named Chris Stevens.
Chris was born in a town called Grass Valley, California, the son of a lawyer and a musician. As a young man, Chris joined the Peace Corps, and taught English in Morocco.  And he cameto love and respect the people of North Africa and the Middle East. He would carry thatcommitment throughout his life.  As a diplomat, he worked from Egypt to Syria, from SaudiArabia to Libya.  He was known for walking the streets of the cities where he worked -- tastingthe local food, meeting as many people as he could, speaking Arabic, listening with a broadsmile. 
Chris went to Benghazi in the early days of the Libyan revolution, arriving on a cargo ship.  AsAmerica’s representative, he helped the Libyan people as they coped with violent conflict,cared for the wounded, and crafted a vision for the future in which the rights of all Libyanswould be respected. And after the revolution, he supported the birth of a new democracy, asLibyans held elections, and built new institutions, and began to move forward after decades ofdictatorship.
Chris Stevens loved his work.  He took pride in the country he served, and he saw dignity inthe people that he met.  And two weeks ago, he traveled to Benghazi to review plans toestablish a new cultural center and modernize a hospital.
  
That’s when America’s compound came under attack.  Along with three of his colleagues,Chris was killed in the city that he helped to save. He was 52 years old. 
I tell you this story because Chris Stevens embodied the best of America.  Like his fellowForeign Service officers, he built bridges across oceans and cultures, and was deeply investedin the international cooperation that the United Nations represents.  He acted with humility,but he also stood up for a set of principles -- a belief that individuals should be free todetermine their own destiny, and live with liberty, dignity, justice, and opportunity. 
The attacks on the civilians in Benghazi were attacks on America.  We are grateful for theassistance we received from the Libyan government and from the Libyan people.  Thereshould be no doubt that we will be relentless in tracking down the killers and bringing them tojustice.  And I also appreciate that in recent days, the leaders of other countries in the region-- including Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen -- have taken steps to secure our diplomatic facilities,and called for calm.  And so have religious authorities around the globe.
But understand, the attacks of the last two weeks are not simply an assault on America.  Theyare also an assault on the very ideals upon which the United Nations was founded -- thenotion that people can resolve their differences peacefully; that diplomacy can take the placeof war; that in an interdependent world, all of us have a stake in working towards greateropportunity and security for our citizens.
If we are serious about upholding these ideals, it will not be enough to put more guards infront of an embassy, or to put out statements of regret and wait for the outrage to pass.  Ifwe are serious about these ideals, we must speak honestly about the deeper causes of thecrisis -- because we face a choice between the forces that would drive us apart and the hopesthat we hold in common.
Today, we must reaffirm that our future will be determined by people like Chris Stevens --and not by his killers.  Today, we must declare that this violence and intolerance has no placeamong our United Nations.
It has been less than two years since a vendor in Tunisia set himself on fire to protest theoppressive corruption in his country, and sparked what became known as the Arab Spring. And since then, the world has been captivated by the transformation that’s taken place, andthe United States has supported the forces of change.
We were inspired by the Tunisian protests that toppled a dictator, because we recognized ourown beliefs in the aspiration of men and women who took to the streets.
We insisted on change in Egypt, because our support for democracy ultimately put us on theside of the people. We supported a transition of leadership in Yemen, because the interests ofthe people were no longer being served by a corrupt status quo.
  
We intervened in Libya alongside a broad coalition, and with the mandate of the UnitedNations Security Council, because we had the ability to stop the slaughter of innocents, andbecause we believed that the aspirations of the people were more powerful than a tyrant.
And as we meet here, we again declare that the regime of Bashar al-Assad must come to anend so that the suffering of the Syrian people can stop and a new dawn can begin.
We have taken these positions because we believe that freedom and self-determination arenot unique to one culture.  These are not simply American values or Western values -- theyare universal values.  And even as there will be huge challenges to come with a transition todemocracy, I am convinced that ultimately government of the people, by the people, and forthe people is more likely to bring about the stability, prosperity, and individual opportunitythat serve as a basis for peace in our world.
So let us remember that this is a season of progress.  For the first time in decades, Tunisians,Egyptians and Libyans voted for new leaders in elections that were credible, competitive, andfair.  This democratic spirit has not been restricted to the Arab world.  Over the past year,we’ve seen peaceful transitions of power in Malawi and Senegal, and a new President inSomalia.  In Burma, a President has freed political prisoners and opened a closed society, acourageous dissident has been elected to parliament, and people look forward to furtherreform.  Around the globe, people are making their voices heard, insisting on their innatedignity, and the right to determine their future.
And yet the turmoil of recent weeks reminds us that the path to democracy does not end withthe casting of a ballot.  Nelson Mandela once said:  "To be free is not merely to cast off one’schains, but to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others."
True democracy demands that citizens cannot be thrown in jail because of what they believe,and that businesses can be opened without paying a bribe.  It depends on the freedom ofcitizens to speak their minds and assemble without fear, and on the rule of law and dueprocess that guarantees the rights of all people.
In other words, true democracy -- real freedom -- is hard work.  Those in power have to resistthe temptation to crack down on dissidents.  In hard economic times, countries must betempted -- may be tempted to rally the people around perceived enemies, at home andabroad, rather than focusing on the painstaking work of reform.
Moreover, there will always be those that reject human progress -- dictators who cling topower, corrupt interests that depend on the status quo, and extremists who fan the flames ofhate and division.
From Northern Ireland to South Asia, from Africa to the Americas, from the Balkans to thePacific Rim, we’ve witnessed convulsions that can accompany transitions to a new politicalorder. 
  
At time, the conflicts arise along the fault lines of race or tribe.  And often they arise from thedifficulties of reconciling tradition and faith with the diversity and interdependence of themodern world.  In every country, there are those who find different religious beliefsthreatening; in every culture, those who love freedom for themselves must ask themselveshow much they’re willing to tolerate freedom for others.
That is what we saw play out in the last two weeks, as a crude and disgusting video sparkedoutrage throughout the Muslim world.  Now, I have made it clear that the United Statesgovernment had nothing to do with this video, and I believe its message must be rejected byall who respect our common humanity.
It is an insult not only to Muslims, but to America as well -- for as the city outside these wallsmakes clear, we are a country that has welcomed people of every race and every faith.  Weare home to Muslims who worship across our country.  We not only respect the freedom ofreligion, we have laws that protect individuals from being harmed because of how they look orwhat they believe.  We understand why people take offense to this video because millions ofour citizens are among them.
I know there are some who ask why we don’t just ban such a video.  And the answer isenshrined in our laws:  Our Constitution protects the right to practice free speech. 
Here in the United States, countless publications provoke offense.  Like me, the majority ofAmericans are Christian, and yet we do not ban blasphemy against our most sacred beliefs. As President of our country and Commander-in-Chief of our military, I accept that people aregoing to call me awful things every day -- and I will always defend their right to do so.
Americans have fought and died around the globe to protect the right of all people to expresstheir views, even views that we profoundly disagree with.  We do not do so because wesupport hateful speech, but because our founders understood that without such protections,the capacity of each individual to express their own views and practice their own faith may bethreatened.  We do so because in a diverse society, efforts to restrict speech can quicklybecome a tool to silence critics and oppress minorities. 
We do so because given the power of faith in our lives, and the passion that religiousdifferences can inflame, the strongest weapon against hateful speech is not repression; it ismore speech -- the voices of tolerance that rally against bigotry and blasphemy, and lift upthe values of understanding and mutual respect.
Now, I know that not all countries in this body share this particular understanding of theprotection of free speech.  We recognize that.  But in 2012, at a time when anyone with a cellphone can spread offensive views around the world with the click of a button, the notion thatwe can control the flow of information is obsolete.  The question, then, is how do werespond? 
  
And on this we must agree:  There is no speech that justifies mindless violence.  There are nowords that excuse the killing of innocents.  There's no video that justifies an attack on anembassy.  There's no slander that provides an excuse for people to burn a restaurant inLebanon, or destroy a school in Tunis, or cause death and destruction in Pakistan. 
In this modern world with modern technologies, for us to respond in that way to hatefulspeech empowers any individual who engages in such speech to create chaos around theworld.  We empower the worst of us if that’s how we respond. 
More broadly, the events of the last two weeks also speak to the need for all of us to honestlyaddress the tensions between the West and the Arab world that is moving towardsdemocracy. 
Now, let me be clear:  Just as we cannot solve every problem in the world, the United Stateshas not and will not seek to dictate the outcome of democratic transitions abroad.  We do notexpect other nations to agree with us on every issue, nor do we assume that the violence ofthe past weeks or the hateful speech by some individuals represent the views of theoverwhelming majority of Muslims, any more than the views of the people who produced thisvideo represents those of Americans.  However, I do believe that it is the obligation of allleaders in all countries to speak out forcefully against violence and extremism.
It is time to marginalize those who -- even when not directly resorting to violence -- usehatred of America, or the West, or Israel, as the central organizing principle of politics. Forthat only gives cover, and sometimes makes an excuse, for those who do resort to violence.
That brand of politics -- one that pits East against West, and South against North, Muslimsagainst Christians and Hindu and Jews -- can’t deliver on the promise of freedom.  To theyouth, it offers only false hope.  Burning an American flag does nothing to provide a child aneducation.  Smashing apart a restaurant does not fill an empty stomach.  Attacking anembassy won’t create a single job.  That brand of politics only makes it harder to achievewhat we must do together:  educating our children, and creating the opportunities that theydeserve; protecting human rights, and extending democracy’s promise.
Understand America will never retreat from the world.  We will bring justice to those whoharm our citizens and our friends, and we will stand with our allies.  We are willing to partnerwith countries around the world to deepen ties of trade and investment, and science andtechnology, energy and development -- all efforts that can spark economic growth for all ourpeople and stabilize democratic change. 
But such efforts depend on a spirit of mutual interest and mutual respect.  No government orcompany, no school or NGO will be confident working in a country where its people areendangered.  For partnerships to be effective our citizens must be secure and our efforts mustbe welcomed.
  
A politics based only on anger -- one based on dividing the world between "us" and "them" --not only sets back international cooperation, it ultimately undermines those who tolerate it. All of us have an interest in standing up to these forces. 
Let us remember that Muslims have suffered the most at the hands of extremism.  On thesame day our civilians were killed in Benghazi, a Turkish police officer was murdered inIstanbul only days before his wedding; more than 10 Yemenis were killed in a car bomb inSana’a; several Afghan children were mourned by their parents just days after they werekilled by a suicide bomber in Kabul.
The impulse towards intolerance and violence may initially be focused on the West, but overtime it cannot be contained.  The same impulses toward extremism are used to justify warbetween Sunni and Shia, between tribes and clans.  It leads not to strength and prosperitybut to chaos.  In less than two years, we have seen largely peaceful protests bring morechange to Muslim-majority countries than a decade of violence.  And extremists understandthis.  Because they have nothing to offer to improve the lives of people, violence is their onlyway to stay relevant.  They don’t build; they only destroy.
It is time to leave the call of violence and the politics of division behind.  On so many issues,we face a choice between the promise of the future, or the prisons of the past.  And we cannotafford to get it wrong.  We must seize this moment.  And America stands ready to work withall who are willing to embrace a better future.
The future must not belong to those who target Coptic Christians in Egypt -- it must beclaimed by those in Tahrir Square who chanted, "Muslims, Christians, we are one."  The futuremust not belong to those who bully women -- it must be shaped by girls who go to school,and those who stand for a world where our daughters can live their dreams just like our sons.
The future must not belong to those corrupt few who steal a country’s resources -- it must bewon by the students and entrepreneurs, the workers and business owners who seek a broaderprosperity for all people.  Those are the women and men that America stands with; theirs isthe vision we will support.  The future must not belong to those who slander the prophet of Islam.  But to be credible,those who condemn that slander must also condemn the hate we see in the images of JesusChrist that are desecrated, or churches that are destroyed, or the Holocaust that is denied.
Let us condemn incitement against Sufi Muslims and Shiite pilgrims.  It’s time to heed thewords of Gandhi:  "Intolerance is itself a form of violence and an obstacle to the growth of atrue democratic spirit."  Together, we must work towards a world where we are strengthenedby our differences, and not defined by them.  That is what America embodies, that’s the visionwe will support.
  
Among Israelis and Palestinians, the future must not belong to those who turn their backs ona prospect of peace.  Let us leave behind those who thrive on conflict, those who reject theright of Israel to exist.  The road is hard, but the destination is clear -- a secure, Jewish stateof Israel and an independent, prosperous Palestine.  Understanding that such a peace mustcome through a just agreement between the parties, America will walk alongside all who areprepared to make that journey.
In Syria, the future must not belong to a dictator who massacres his people.  If there is acause that cries out for protest in the world today, peaceful protest, it is a regime thattortures children and shoots rockets at apartment buildings.  And we must remain engaged toassure that what began with citizens demanding their rights does not end in a cycle ofsectarian violence. 
Together, we must stand with those Syrians who believe in a different vision -- a Syria that isunited and inclusive, where children don’t need to fear their own government, and all Syrianshave a say in how they are governed -- Sunnis and Alawites, Kurds and Christians.  That’swhat America stands for.  That is the outcome that we will work for -- with sanctions andconsequences for those who persecute, and assistance and support for those who work forthis common good.  Because we believe that the Syrians who embrace this vision will have thestrength and the legitimacy to lead.
In Iran, we see where the path of a violent and unaccountable ideology leads.  The Iranianpeople have a remarkable and ancient history, and many Iranians wish to enjoy peace andprosperity alongside their neighbors.  But just as it restricts the rights of its own people, theIranian government continues to prop up a dictator in Damascus and supports terrorist groupsabroad.  Time and again, it has failed to take the opportunity to demonstrate that its nuclearprogram is peaceful, and to meet its obligations to the United Nations.
So let me be clear.  America wants to resolve this issue through diplomacy, and we believethat there is still time and space to do so.  But that time is not unlimited.  We respect theright of nations to access peaceful nuclear power, but one of the purposes of the UnitedNations is to see that we harness that power for peace.  And make no mistake, a nuclear-
armed Iran is not a challenge that can be contained.  It would threaten the elimination ofIsrael, the security of Gulf nations, and the stability of the global economy.  It risks triggeringa nuclear-arms race in the region, and the unraveling of the non-proliferation treaty.  That’swhy a coalition of countries is holding the Iranian government accountable.  And that’s whythe United States will do what we must to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
We know from painful experience that the path to security and prosperity does not lie outsidethe boundaries of international law and respect for human rights.  That’s why this institutionwas established from the rubble of conflict.  That is why liberty triumphed over tyranny in theCold War.  And that is the lesson of the last two decades as well. 
  
History shows that peace and progress come to those who make the right choices.  Nations inevery part of the world have traveled this difficult path.  Europe, the bloodiest battlefield ofthe 20th century, is united, free and at peace.  From Brazil to South Africa, from Turkey toSouth Korea, from India to Indonesia, people of different races, religions, and traditions havelifted millions out of poverty, while respecting the rights of their citizens and meeting theirresponsibilities as nations.
And it is because of the progress that I’ve witnessed in my own lifetime, the progress that I’vewitnessed after nearly four years as President, that I remain ever hopeful about the world thatwe live in.  The war in Iraq is over.  American troops have come home.  We’ve begun atransition in Afghanistan, and America and our allies will end our war on schedule in 2014.  AlQaeda has been weakened, and Osama bin Laden is no more.  Nations have come together tolock down nuclear materials, and America and Russia are reducing our arsenals.  We haveseen hard choices made -- from Naypyidaw to Cairo to Abidjan -- to put more power in thehands of citizens.
At a time of economic challenge, the world has come together to broaden prosperity.  Throughthe G20, we have partnered with emerging countries to keep the world on the path ofrecovery.  America has pursued a development agenda that fuels growth and breaksdependency, and worked with African leaders to help them feed their nations.  Newpartnerships have been forged to combat corruption and promote government that is openand transparent, and new commitments have been made through the Equal FuturesPartnership to ensure that women and girls can fully participate in politics and pursueopportunity.  And later today, I will discuss our efforts to combat the scourge of humantrafficking.
All these things give me hope.  But what gives me the most hope is not the actions of us, notthe actions of leaders -- it is the people that I’ve seen.  The American troops who have riskedtheir lives and sacrificed their limbs for strangers half a world away; the students in Jakarta orSeoul who are eager to use their knowledge to benefit mankind; the faces in a square inPrague or a parliament in Ghana who see democracy giving voice to their aspirations; theyoung people in the favelas of Rio and the schools of Mumbai whose eyes shine with promise. These men, women, and children of every race and every faith remind me that for everyangry mob that gets shown on television, there are billions around the world who sharesimilar hopes and dreams.  They tell us that there is a common heartbeat to humanity.
So much attention in our world turns to what divides us.  That’s what we see on the news. That's what consumes our political debates.  But when you strip it all away, peopleeverywhere long for the freedom to determine their destiny; the dignity that comes withwork; the comfort that comes with faith; and the justice that exists when governments servetheir people  -- and not the other way around.
  
The United States of America will always stand up for these aspirations, for our own peopleand for people all across the world.  That was our founding purpose.  That is what our historyshows.  That is what Chris Stevens worked for throughout his life.
And I promise you this:  Long after the killers are brought to justice, Chris Stevens’s legacywill live on in the lives that he touched -- in the tens of thousands who marched againstviolence through the streets of Benghazi; in the Libyans who changed their Facebook photo toone of Chris; in the signs that read, simply, "Chris Stevens was a friend to all Libyans."
They should give us hope.  They should remind us that so long as we work for it, justice willbe done, that history is on our side, and that a rising tide of liberty will never be reversed.
Thank you very much.
