Thank you, John, for the gracious introduction.  To Mike and Eric, thank you for hosting me. Thank you to all of you for receiving me.  It is  wonderful to be here.  I want to alsoacknowledge Mark Strand, president of the Congressional Institute.  To all the familymembers who are here and who have to put up with us for an elective office each and everyday, thank you, because I know that's tough.
I very much am appreciative of not only the tone of your introduction, John, but also theinvitation that you extended to me.  You know what they say, "Keep your friends close, butvisit the Republican Caucus every few months."
Part of the reason I accepted your invitation to come here was because I wanted to speakwith all of you, and not just to all of you.  So I'm looking forward to taking your questions andhaving a real conversation in a few moments.  And I hope that the conversation we begin heredoesn't end here; that we can continue our dialogue in the days ahead.  It's important to methat we do so.  It's important to you, I think, that we do so.  But most importantly, it'simportant to the American people that we do so.

I've said this before, but I'm a big believer not just in the value of a loyal opposition, but in itsnecessity.  Having differences of opinion, having a real debate about matters of domesticpolicy and national security -- and that's not something that's only good for our country, it'sabsolutely essential.  It's only through the process of disagreement and debate that bad ideasget tossed out and good ideas get refined and made better.  And that kind of vigorous backand forth -- that imperfect but well-founded process, messy as it often is -- is at the heart ofour democracy.  That's what makes us the greatest nation in the world.
So, yes, I want you to challenge my ideas, and I guarantee you that after reading this I maychallenge a few of yours. I want you to stand up for your beliefs, and knowing this caucus, Ihave no doubt that you will.  I want us to have a constructive debate.  The only thing I don'twant -- and here I am listening to the American people, and I think they don't want either --is for Washington to continue being so Washington-like.  I know folks, when we're in townthere, spend a lot of time reading the polls and looking at focus groups and interpreting whichparty has the upper hand in November and in 2012 and so on and so on and so on.  That'stheir obsession.
And I'm not a pundit.  I'm just a President, so take it for what it's worth.  But I don't believethat the American people want us to focus on our job security.  They want us to focus on theirjob security. I don't think they want more gridlock.  I don't think they want morepartisanship.  I don't think they want more obstruction.  They didn't send us to Washington tofight each other in some sort of political steel-cage match to see who comes out alive.  That'snot what they want.  They sent us to Washington to work together, to get things done, and tosolve the problems that they're grappling with every single day.
And I think your constituents would want to know that despite the fact it doesn't get a lot ofattention, you and I have actually worked together on a number of occasions.  There havebeen times where we've acted in a bipartisan fashion.  And I want to thank you and yourDemocratic colleagues for reaching across the aisle.  There has been, for example, broadsupport for putting in the troops necessary in Afghanistan to deny al Qaeda safe haven, tobreak the Taliban's momentum, and to train Afghan security forces.  There's been broadsupport for disrupting, dismantling, and defeating al Qaeda.  And I know that we're all unitedin our admiration of our troops.
So it may be useful for the international audience right now to understand -- and certainly forour enemies to have no doubt -- whatever divisions and differences may exist in Washington,the United States of America stands as one to defend our country.
It's that same spirit of bipartisanship that made it possible for me to sign a defensecontracting reform bill that was cosponsored by Senator McCain and members of Congresshere today.  We've stood together on behalf of our nation's veterans.  Together we passed thelargest increase in the VA's budget in more than 30 years and supported essential veterans'health care reforms to provide better access and medical care for those who serve in uniform.

Some of you also joined Democrats in supporting a Credit Card Bill of Rights and in extendingunemployment compensation to Americans who are out of work.  Some of you joined us instopping tobacco companies from targeting kids, expanding opportunities for young people toserve our country, and helping responsible homeowners stay in their homes.
So we have a track record of working together.  It is possible.  But, as John, you mentioned,on some very big things, we've seen party-line votes that, I'm just going to be honest, weredisappointing.  Let's start with our efforts to jumpstart the economy last winter, when wewere losing 700,000 jobs a month.  Our financial system teetered on the brink of collapse andthe threat of a second Great Depression loomed large.  I didn't understand then, and I stilldon't understand, why we got opposition in this caucus for almost $300 billion in badly neededtax cuts for the American people, or COBRA coverage to help Americans who've lost jobs inthis recession to keep the health insurance that they desperately needed, or opposition toputting Americans to work laying broadband and rebuilding roads and bridges and breakingground on new construction projects.
There was an interesting headline in CNN today:  "Americans disapprove of stimulus, but likeevery policy in it."  And there was a poll that showed that if you broke it down into itscomponent parts, 80 percent approved of the tax cuts, 80 percent approved of theinfrastructure, 80 percent approved of the assistance to the unemployed.
Well, that's what the Recovery Act was.  And let's face it, some of you have been at theribbon-cuttings for some of these important projects in your communities.  Now, I understandsome of you had some philosophical differences perhaps on the just the concept ofgovernment spending, but, as I recall, opposition was declared before we had a chance toactually meet and exchange ideas.  And I saw that as a missed opportunity.
Now, I am happy to report this morning that we saw another sign that our economy is movingin the right direction.  The latest GDP numbers show that our economy is growing by almost 6percent -- that's the most since 2003.  To put that in perspective, this time last year, weweren't seeing positive job growth; we were seeing the economy shrink by about 6 percent.
So you've seen a 12 percent reversal during the course of this year.  This turnaround is thebiggest in nearly three decades -- and it didn't happen by accident.  It happened -- aseconomists, conservative and liberal, will attest -- because of some of the steps that we took. 
And by the way, you mentioned a Web site out here, John --  if you want to look at what'sgoing on, on the Recovery Act, you can look on recovery.gov -- a Web site, by the way, thatwas Eric Cantor's idea.
Now, here's the point.  These are serious times, and what's required by all of us -- Democratsand Republicans -- is to do what's right for our country, even if it's not always what's best forour politics.  I know it may be heresy to say this, but there are things more important thangood poll numbers.

And on this no one can accuse me of not living by my principles. A middle class that's back onits feet, an economy that lifts everybody up, an America that's ascendant in the world -- that'smore important than winning an election.  Our future shouldn't be shaped by what's best forour politics; our politics should be shaped by what's best for our future.
But no matter what's happened in the past, the important thing for all of us is to moveforward together.  We have some issues right in front of us on which I believe we shouldagree, because as successful as we've been in spurring new economic growth, everybodyunderstands that job growth has been lagging.  Some of that's predictable.  Every economistwill say jobs are a lagging indicator, but that's no consolation for the folks who are out theresuffering right now.  And since 7 million Americans have lost their jobs in this recession, we'vegot to do everything we can to accelerate it.
So, today, in line with what I stated at the State of the Union, I've proposed a new jobs taxcredit for small business.  And here's how it would work.  Employers would get a tax credit ofup to $5,000 for every employee they add in 2010.  They'd get a tax break for increases inwages, as well.  So, if you raise wages for employees making under $100,000, we'd refundpart of your payroll tax for every dollar you increase those wages faster than inflation.  It's asimple concept.  It's easy to understand.  It would cut taxes for more than 1 million smallbusinesses.
So I hope you join me.  Let's get this done.  I want to eliminate the capital gains tax for smallbusiness investment, and take some of the bailout money the Wall Street banks havereturned and use it to help community banks start lending to small businesses again.  So joinme.  I am confident that we can do this together for the American people.  And there'snothing in that proposal that runs contrary to the ideological predispositions of this caucus. The question is:  What's going to keep us from getting this done?
I've proposed a modest fee on the nation's largest banks and financial institutions to fullyrecover for taxpayers' money that they provided to the financial sector when it was teeteringon the brink of collapse.  And it's designed to discourage them from taking reckless risks inthe future.  If you listen to the American people, John, they'll tell you they want their moneyback.  Let's do this together, Republicans and Democrats.
I propose that we close tax loopholes that reward companies for shipping American jobsoverseas, and instead give companies greater incentive to create jobs right here at home --right here at home.  Surely, that's something that we can do together, Republicans andDemocrats.
We know that we've got a major fiscal challenge in reining in deficits that have been growingfor a decade, and threaten our future.  That's why I've proposed a three-year freeze indiscretionary spending other than what we need for national security.  That's something weshould do together that's consistent with a lot of the talk both in Democratic caucuses andRepublican caucuses.  We can't blink when it's time to actually do the job.

At this point, we know that the budget surpluses of the '90s occurred in part because of thepay-as-you-go law, which said that, well, you should pay as you go and live within our means,just like families do every day.  Twenty-four of you voted for that, and I appreciate it.  And wewere able to pass it in the Senate yesterday.
But the idea of a bipartisan fiscal commission to confront the deficits in the long term died inthe Senate the other day.  So I'm going to establish such a commission by executive orderand I hope that you participate, fully and genuinely, in that effort, because if we're going toactually deal with our deficit and debt, everybody here knows that we're going to have to do ittogether, Republican and Democrat.  No single party is going to make the tough choicesinvolved on its own.  It's going to require all of us doing what's right for the American people.
And as I said in the State of the Union speech, there's not just a deficit of dollars inWashington, there is a deficit of trust.  So I hope you'll support my proposal to make allcongressional earmarks public before they come to a vote.  And let's require lobbyists whoexercise such influence to publicly disclose all their contacts on behalf of their clients, whetherthey are contacts with my administration or contacts with Congress.  Let's do the people'sbusiness in the bright light of day, together, Republicans and Democrats.
I know how bitter and contentious the issue of health insurance reform has become.  And Iwill eagerly look at the ideas and better solutions on the health care front.  If anyone heretruly believes our health insurance system is working well for people, I respect your right tosay so, but I just don't agree.  And neither would millions of Americans with preexistingconditions who can't get coverage today or find out that they lose their insurance just asthey're getting seriously ill.  That's exactly when you need insurance.  And for too manypeople, they're not getting it.  I don't think a system is working when small businesses aregouged and 15,000 Americans are losing coverage every single day; when premiums havedoubled and out-of-pocket costs have exploded and they're poised to do so again.
I mean, to be fair, the status quo is working for the insurance industry, but it's not working forthe American people.  It's not working for our federal budget.  It needs to change.
This is a big problem, and all of us are called on to solve it.  And that's why, from the start, Isought out and supported ideas from Republicans.  I even talked about an issue that has beena holy grail for a lot of you, which was tort reform, and said that I'd be willing to worktogether as part of a comprehensive package to deal with it.  I just didn't get a lot of nibbles.
Creating a high-risk pool for uninsured folks with preexisting conditions, that wasn't my idea,it was Senator McCain's.  And I supported it, and it got incorporated into our approach. Allowing insurance companies to sell coverage across state lines to add choice andcompetition and bring down costs for businesses and consumers -- that's an idea that some ofyou I suspect included in this better solutions; that's an idea that was incorporated into ourpackage.  And I support it, provided that we do it hand in hand with broader reforms thatprotect benefits and protect patients and protect the American people.

A number of you have suggested creating pools where self-employed and small businessescould buy insurance.  That was a good idea.  I embraced it.  Some of you supported efforts toprovide insurance to children and let kids remain covered on their parents' insurance untilthey're 25 or 26.  I supported that.  That's part of our package.  I supported a number ofother ideas, from incentivizing wellness to creating an affordable catastrophic insurance optionfor young people that came from Republicans like Mike Enzi and Olympia Snowe in theSenate, and I'm sure from some of you as well.  So when you say I ought to be willing toaccept Republican ideas on health care, let's be clear:  I have.
Bipartisanship -- not for its own sake but to solve problems -- that's what our constituents,the American people, need from us right now.  All of us then have a choice to make.  We haveto choose whether we're going to be politicians first or partners for progress; whether we'regoing to put success at the polls ahead of the lasting success we can achieve together forAmerica.  Just think about it for a while.  We don't have to put it up for a vote today.
Let me close by saying this.  I was not elected by Democrats or Republicans, but by theAmerican people.  That's especially true because the fastest growing group of Americans areindependents.  That should tell us both something.  I'm ready and eager to work with anyonewho is willing to proceed in a spirit of goodwill.  But understand, if we can't break free frompartisan gridlock, if we can't move past a politics of "no," if resistance supplants constructivedebate, I still have to meet my responsibilities as President.  I've got to act for the greatergood –- because that, too, is a commitment that I have made.  And that's -- that, too, is whatthe American people sent me to Washington to do.
So I am optimistic.  I know many of you individually.  And the irony, I think, of our politicalclimate right now is that, compared to other countries, the differences between the two majorparties on most issues is not as big as it's represented.  But we've gotten caught up in thepolitical game in a way that's just not healthy.  It's dividing our country in ways that arepreventing us from meeting the challenges of the 21st century.  I'm hopeful that theconversation we have today can help reverse that.
So thank you very much.  Thank you, John. Now I'd like to open it up for questions.
Congressman Pence:  The President has agreed to take questions and members would beencouraged to raise your hand while you remain in your seat. The chair will take theprerogative to make the first remarks. Mr. President, welcome back to the House RepublicanConference.
President Obama:  Thank you.

Congressman Pence:  [Off microphone.]  We are pleased to have you return.  [Inaudible] ayear ago -- House Republicans said then we would make you two promises.  Number one, thatmost of the people in this room and their families would pray for you and your beautiful familyjust about every day for the next four years.  And I want to assure you we're keeping thatpromise.
President Obama:  I appreciate that.
Congressman Pence:  [off microphone] Number two, our pledge to you, Mr. President, wasthat door is always open.  And we hope the [inaudible] of our invitation that we [inaudible].
Mr. President, several of us in this conference yesterday on the way into Baltimore stopped bythe Salvation Army homeless facility here in Baltimore.  I met a little boy, an African Americanboy, in the 8th grade, named David Carter, Jr.  When he heard that I would be seeing youtoday his eyes lit up like I had never seen.  And I told him that if he wrote you a letter I'd giveit to you, and I have.
But I had a conversation with little David, Jr. and David, Sr.  His family has been strugglingwith the economy.
[On microphone.]  His dad said words to me, Mr. President, that I'll never forget.  About myage and he said -- he said, Congressman, it's not like it was when we were coming up.  Hesaid, there's just no jobs.
Now, last year about the time you met with us, unemployment was 7.5 percent in thiscountry.  Your administration, and your party in Congress, told us that we'd have to borrowmore than $700 billion to pay for a so-called stimulus bill.  It was a piecemeal list of projectsand boutique tax cuts, all of which was -- we were told -- had to be passed or unemploymentwould go to 8 percent, as your administration said.  Well, unemployment is 10 percent now,as you well know, Mr. President; here in Baltimore it's considerably higher.
Now, Republicans offered a stimulus bill at the same time.  It cost half as much as theDemocratic proposal in Congress, and using your economic analyst models, it would havecreated twice the jobs at half the cost.  It essentially was across-the-board tax relief, Mr.President.
Now we know you've come to Baltimore today and you've raised this tax credit, which waslast promoted by President Jimmy Carter.  But the first question I would pose to you, veryrespectfully, Mr. President, is would you be willing to consider embracing -- in the name oflittle David Carter, Jr. and his dad, in the name of every struggling family in this country --the kind of across-the-board tax relief that Republicans have advocated, that PresidentKennedy advocated, that President Reagan advocated and that has always been the means ofstimulating broad-based economic growth?

President Obama:  Well, there was a lot packed into that question. First of all, let me say Ialready promised that I'll be writing back to that young man and his family, and I appreciateyou passing on the letter.
Member: Thank you.
President Obama:  But let's talk about just the jobs environment generally.  You'reabsolutely right that when I was sworn in the hope was that unemployment would remainaround 8 [percent], or in the 8 percent range.  That was just based on the estimates made byboth conservative and liberal economists, because at that point not all the data had trickledin.
We had lost 650,000 jobs in December.  I'm assuming you're not faulting my policies for that. We had lost, it turns out, 700,000 jobs in January, the month I was sworn in.  I'm assuming itwasn't my administration's policies that accounted for that.  We lost another 650,000 jobs thesubsequent month, before any of my policies had gone into effect.  So I'm assuming thatwasn't as a consequence of our policies; that doesn't reflect the failure of the Recovery Act. The point being that what ended up happening was that the job losses from this recessionproved to be much more severe -- in the first quarter of last year going into the secondquarter of last year -- than anybody anticipated.
So I mean, I think we can score political points on the basis of the fact that weunderestimated how severe the job losses were going to be.  But those job losses took placebefore any stimulus, whether it was the ones that you guys have proposed or the ones thatwe proposed, could have ever taken into effect.  Now, that's just the fact, Mike, and I don'tthink anybody would dispute that.  You could not find an economist who would dispute that.
Now, at the same time, as I mentioned, most economists -- Republican and Democrat, liberaland conservative -- would say that had it not been for the stimulus package that we passed,things would be much worse.  Now, they didn't fill a 7 million hole in the number of peoplewho were unemployed.  They probably account for about 2 million, which means we still have5 million folks in there that we've still got to deal with.  That's a lot of people.
The package that we put together at the beginning of the year, the truth is, should havereflected -- and I believe reflected what most of you would say are common sense things. This notion that this was a radical package is just not true.  A third of them were tax cuts, andthey weren't -- when you say they were "boutique" tax cuts, Mike, 95 percent of workingAmericans got tax cuts, small businesses got tax cuts, large businesses got help in terms oftheir depreciation schedules.  I mean, it was a pretty conventional list of tax cuts.  A third of itwas stabilizing state budgets.

There is not a single person in here who, had it not been for what was in the stimuluspackage, wouldn't be going home to more teachers laid off, more firefighters laid off, morecops laid off.  A big chunk of it was unemployment insurance and COBRA, just making surethat people had some floor beneath them, and, by the way, making sure that there wasenough money in their pockets that businesses had some customers.
You take those two things out, that accounts for the majority of the stimulus package.  Arethere people in this room who think that was a bad idea?  A portion of it was dealing with theAMT, the alternative minimum tax -- not a proposal of mine; that's not a consequence of mypolicies that we have a tax system where we keep on putting off a potential tax hike that isembedded in the budget that we have to fix each year.  That cost about $70 billion.
And then the last portion of it was infrastructure which, as I said, a lot of you have gone toappear at ribbon-cuttings for the same projects that you voted against.
Now, I say all this not to re-litigate the past, but it's simply to state that the component partsof the Recovery Act are consistent with what many of you say are important things to do --rebuilding our infrastructure, tax cuts for families and businesses, and making sure that wewere providing states and individuals some support when the roof was caving in.
And the notion that I would somehow resist doing something that cost half as much but wouldproduce twice as many jobs -- why would I resist that?  I wouldn't.  I mean, that's my point,is that -- I am not an ideologue.  I'm not.  It doesn't make sense if somebody could tell meyou could do this cheaper and get increased results that I wouldn't say, great.  The problemis, I couldn't find credible economists who would back up the claims that you just made.
Now, we can -- here's what I know going forward, though.  I mean, we're talking -- we weretalking about the past.  We can talk about this going forward.  I have looked at every idea outthere in terms of accelerating job growth to match the economic growth that's already takenplace.  The jobs credit that I'm discussing right now is one that a lot of people think would bethe most cost-effective way for encouraging people to pick up their hiring.
There may be other ideas that you guys have; I am happy to look at them and I'm happy toembrace them.  I suspect I will embrace some of them.  Some of them I've already embraced.
But the question I think we're going to have to ask ourselves is, as we move forward, are wegoing to be examining each of these issues based on what's good for the country, what theevidence tells us, or are we going to be trying to position ourselves so that come Novemberwe're able to say, "The other party, it's their fault."  If we take the latter approach then we'reprobably not going to get much agreement.  If we take the former, I suspect there's going tobe a lot of overlap.  All right?
Congressman Pence:  Mr. President, will you consider supporting across-the-board taxrelief, as President Kennedy did?

President Obama:  Here's what I'm going to do, Mike.  What I'm going to do is I'm going totake a look at what you guys are proposing.  And the reason I say this, before you say,"Okay," I think is important to know -- what you may consider across-the-board tax cutscould be, for example, greater tax cuts for people who are making a billion dollars.  I may notagree to a tax cut for Warren Buffet.  You may be calling for an across-the-board tax cut forthe banking industry right now.  I may not agree to that.
So I think that we've got to look at what specific proposals you're putting forward, and -- thisis the last point I'll make -- if you're calling for just across-the-board tax cuts, and then on theother hand saying that we're somehow going to balance our budget, I'm going to want to takea look at your math and see how that works, because the issue of deficit and debt is anotherarea where there has been a tendency for some inconsistent statements.  How's that?  Allright?
Congressman Ryan:  Thank you.  Mr. President, first off, thanks for agreeing to accept ourinvitation here.  It is a real pleasure and honor to have you with us here today.
President Obama:  Good to see you.  Is this your crew right here, by the way?
Congressman Ryan:  It is.  This is my daughter Liza, my son Charlie and Sam, and this ismy wife Janna. President Obama:  Hey, guys.
Congressman Ryan:  Say hi, everybody. I serve as a ranking member of the budgetcommittee, so I'm going to talk a little budget if you don't mind.  The spending bills thatyou've signed into law, the domestic discretionary spending has been increased by 84percent.  You now want to freeze spending at this elevated beginning next year.  This meansthat total spending in your budget would grow at 3/100ths of 1 percent less than otherwise.  Iwould simply submit that we could do more and start now.
You've also said that you want to take a scalpel to the budget and go through it line by line. We want to give you that scalpel.  I have a proposal with my home state senator, RussFeingold, bipartisan proposal, to create a constitutional version of the line-item veto. Problemis, we can't even get a vote on the proposal.
So my question is, why not start freezing spending now, and would you support a line-itemveto in helping us get a vote on it in the House?
President Obama:  Let me respond to the two specific questions, but I want to just pushback a little bit on the underlying premise about us increasing spending by 84 percent.

Now, look, I talked to Peter Orszag right before I came here, because I suspected I'd behearing this -- I'd be hearing this argument.  The fact of the matter is, is that most of theincreases in this year's budget, this past year's budget, were not as a consequence of policiesthat we initiated but instead were built in as a consequence of the automatic stabilizers thatkick in because of this enormous recession.
So the increase in the budget for this past year was actually predicted before I was evensworn into office and had initiated any policies.  Whoever was in there, Paul -- and I don'tthink you'll dispute that -- whoever was in there would have seen those same increasesbecause of, on the one hand, huge drops in revenue, but at the same time people werehurting and needed help.  And a lot of these things happened automatically.
Now, the reason that I'm not proposing the discretionary freeze take into effect this year --we prepared a budget for 2010, it's now going forward -- is, again, I am just listening to theconsensus among people who know the economy best.  And what they will say is that if youeither increase taxes or significantly lowered spending when the economy remains somewhatfragile, that that would have a destimulative effect and potentially you'd see a lot of folkslosing business, more folks potentially losing jobs.  That would be a mistake when theeconomy has not fully taken off.  That's why I've proposed to do it for the next fiscal year.  Sothat's point number two.
With respect to the line-item veto, I actually -- I think there's not a President out there thatwouldn't love to have it.  And I think that this is an area where we can have a seriousconversation.  I know it is a bipartisan proposal by you and Russ Feingold.  I don't like beingheld up with big bills that have stuff in them that are wasteful but I've got to sign because it'sa defense authorization bill and I've got to make sure that our troops are getting the fundingthat they need.
I will tell you, I would love for Congress itself to show discipline on both sides of the aisle.  Ithink one thing that you have to acknowledge, Paul, because you study this stuff and take itpretty seriously, that the earmarks problem is not unique to one party and you end up gettinga lot of pushback when you start going after specific projects of any one of you in yourdistricts, because wasteful spending is usually spent somehow outside of your district.  Haveyou noticed that?  The spending in your district tends to seem pretty sensible.
So I would love to see more restraint within Congress.  I'd like to work on the earmarksreforms that I mentioned in terms of putting earmarks online, because I think sunshine is thebest disinfectant.  But I am willing to have a serious conversation on the line-item veto issue.
Congressman Ryan:  I'd like to walk you through that, because we have a version we thinkis constitutional.
President Obama:  Let me take a look at it.

Congressman Ryan:  I would simply say that automatic stabilizer spending is mandatoryspending.  The discretionary spending, the bills that Congress signs that you sign into law,that has increased 84 percent.
President Obama:  We'll have a longer debate on the budget numbers, all right?
Congressman Pence:  Shelley Moore Capito, West Virginia.
Congresswoman Capito:  Thank you, Mr. President, for joining us here today.  As you saidin the State of the Union address on Wednesday, jobs and the economy are number one.  AndI think everyone in this room, certainly I, agree with you on that.
I represent the state of West Virginia.  We're resource-rich.  We have a lot of coal and a lot ofnatural gas.  But our -- my miners and the folks who are working and those who areunemployed are very concerned about some of your policies in these areas:  cap and trade,an aggressive EPA, and the looming prospect of higher taxes.  In our minds, these are job-
killing policies.  So I'm asking you if you would be willing to re-look at some of these policies,with a high unemployment and the unsure economy that we have now, to assure WestVirginians that you're listening.
President Obama:  Look, I listen all the time, including to your governor, who's somebodywho I enjoyed working with a lot before the campaign and now that I'm President.  And Iknow that West Virginia struggles with unemployment, and I know how important coal is toWest Virginia and a lot of the natural resources there.  That's part of the reason why I've saidthat we need a comprehensive energy policy that sets us up for a long-term future.
For example, nobody has been a bigger promoter of clean coal technology than I am. Testament to that, I ended up being in a whole bunch of advertisements that you guys saw allthe time about investing in ways for us to burn coal more cleanly.
I've said that I'm a promoter of nuclear energy, something that I think over the last threedecades has been subject to a lot of partisan wrangling and ideological wrangling.  I don'tthink it makes sense.  I think that that has to be part of our energy mix.  I've said that I amsupportive -- and I said this two nights ago at the State of the Union -- that I am in favor ofincreased production.
So if you look at the ideas that this caucus has, again with respect to energy, I'm for a lot ofwhat you said you are for.
The one thing that I've also said, though, and here we have a serious disagreement and myhope is we can work through these disagreements -- there's going to be an effort on theSenate side to do so on a bipartisan basis -- is that we have to plan for the future.

And the future is that clean energy -- cleaner forms of energy are going to be increasinglyimportant, because even if folks are still skeptical in some cases about climate change in ourpolitics and in Congress, the world is not skeptical about it.  If we're going to be after some ofthese big markets, they're going to be looking to see, is the United States the one that'sdeveloping clean coal technology?  Is the United States developing our natural gas resourcesin the most effective way?  Is the United States the one that is going to lead in electric cars? Because if we're not leading, those other countries are going to be leading.
So what I want to do is work with West Virginia to figure out how we can seize that future. But to do that, that means there's going to have to be some transition.  We can't operate thecoal industry in the United States as if we're still in the 1920s or the 1930s or the 1950s. We've got to be thinking what does that industry look like in the next hundred years.  And it'sgoing to be different.  And that means there's going to be some transition.  And that's where Ithink a well-thought-through policy of incentivizing the new while recognizing that there'sgoing to be a transition process -- and we're not just suddenly putting the old out of businessright away -- that has to be something that both Republicans and Democrats should be ableto embrace.
Congressman Pence:  Jason Chaffetz, Utah.
Congressman Chafetz:  Thank you, Mr. President.  It's truly an honor.
President Obama:  Great to be here.
Congressman Chafetz:  And I appreciate you being here.
I'm one of 22 House freshmen.  We didn't create this mess, but we are here to help clean itup.  You talked a lot about this deficit of trust.  There's some things that have happened that Iwould appreciate your perspective on, because I can look you in the eye and tell you we havenot been obstructionists.  Democrats have the House and Senate and the presidency.  Andwhen you stood up before the American people multiple times and said you would broadcastthe health care debates on C-SPAN, you didn't.  And I was disappointed, and I think a lot ofAmericans were disappointed.
You said you weren't going to allow lobbyists in the senior-most positions within youradministration, and yet you did.  I applauded you when you said it -- and disappointed whenyou didn't.
You said you'd go line by line through the health care debate -- or through the health carebill.  And there were six of us, including Dr. Phil Roe, who sent you a letter and said, "Wewould like to take you up on the offer; we'd like to come."  We never heard a letter, we nevergot a call.  We were never involved in any of those discussions.

And when you said in the House of Representatives that you were going to tackle earmarks --in fact, you didn't want to have any earmarks in any of your bills -- I jumped up out of myseat and applauded you.  But it didn't happen.
More importantly, I want to talk about moving forward, but if we could address --
President Obama:  Well, how about --
Congressman Chafetz:  -- I would certainly appreciate it.
President Obama:  That was a long list, so -- let me respond.
Look, the truth of the matter is that if you look at the health care process -- just over thecourse of the year -- overwhelmingly the majority of it actually was on C-SPAN, because itwas taking place in congressional hearings in which you guys were participating.  I mean, howmany committees were there that helped to shape this bill?  Countless hearings took place.
Now, I kicked it off, by the way, with a meeting with many of you, including your keyleadership.  What is true, there's no doubt about it, is that once it got through the committeeprocess and there were now a series of meetings taking place all over the Capitol trying tofigure out how to get the thing together -- that was a messy process.  And I takeresponsibility for not having structured it in a way where it was all taking place in one placethat could be filmed.  How to do that logistically would not have been as easy as it sounds,because you're shuttling back and forth between the House, the Senate, different offices, etcetera, different legislators.  But I think it's a legitimate criticism.  So on that one, I takeresponsibility.
With respect to earmarks, we didn't have earmarks in the Recovery Act.  We didn't get a lot ofcredit for it, but there were no earmarks in that.  I was confronted at the beginning of myterm with an omnibus package that did have a lot of earmarks from Republicans andDemocrats, and a lot of people in this chamber.  And the question was whether I was going tohave a big budget fight, at a time when I was still trying to figure out whether or not thefinancial system was melting down and we had to make a whole bunch of emergencydecisions about the economy.  So what I said was let's keep them to a minimum, but Icouldn't excise them all.
Now, the challenge I guess I would have for you as a freshman, is what are you doing insideyour caucus to make sure that I'm not the only guy who is responsible for this stuff, so thatwe're working together, because this is going to be a process?
When we talk about earmarks, I think all of us are willing to acknowledge that some of themare perfectly defensible, good projects; it's just they haven't gone through the regularappropriations process in the full light of day.  So one place to start is to make sure that theyare at least transparent, that everybody knows what's there before we move forward.

In terms of lobbyists, I can stand here unequivocally and say that there has not been anadministration who was tougher on making sure that lobbyists weren't participating in theadministration than any administration that's come before us.
Now, what we did was, if there were lobbyists who were on boards and commissions that werecarryovers and their term hadn't been completed, we didn't kick them off.  We simply saidthat moving forward any time a new slot opens, they're being replaced.
So we've actually been very consistent in making sure that we are eliminating the impact oflobbyists, day in, day out, on how this administration operates.  There have been a handful ofwaivers where somebody is highly skilled -- for example, a doctor who ran Tobacco-Free Kidstechnically is a registered lobbyist; on the other end, has more experience than anybody infiguring out how kids don't get hooked on cigarettes.
So there have been a couple of instances like that, but generally we've been very consistenton that front.
Congressman Pence: Marsha Blackburn, Tennessee.
Congresswoman Blackburn:  Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you for acknowledgingthat we have ideas on health care because, indeed, we do have ideas, we have plans, we haveover 50 bills, we have lots of amendments that would bring health care ideas to the forefront. We would -- we've got plans to lower cost, to change purchasing models, address medicalliability, insurance accountability, chronic and preexisting conditions, and access to affordablecare for those with those conditions, insurance portability, expanded access -- but not doing itwith creating more government, more bureaucracy, and more cost for the American taxpayer.
And we look forward to sharing those ideas with you.  We want to work with you on healthreform and making certain that we do it in an affordable, cost-effective way that is going toreduce bureaucracy, reduce government interference, and reduce costs to individuals and totaxpayers.  And if those good ideas aren't making it to you, maybe it's the House Democratleadership that is an impediment instead of a conduit.
But we're concerned also that there are some lessons learned from public option health careplans that maybe are not being heeded.  And certainly in my state of Tennessee, we were thetest case for public option health care in 1994, and our Democrat government has evencautioned that maybe our experiences there would provide some lessons learned that shouldbe heeded, and would provide guidance for us to go forward.  And as you said, what weshould be doing is tossing old ideas out, bad ideas out, and moving forward in refining goodideas.  And certainly we would welcome that opportunity.

So my question to you is, when will we look forward to starting anew and sitting down withyou to put all of these ideas on the table, to look at these lessons learned, to benefit from thatexperience, and to produce a product that is going to reduce government interference, reducecost, and be fair to the American taxpayer?
President Obama:  Actually, I've gotten many of your ideas.  I've taken a look at them, evenbefore I was handed this.  Some of the ideas we have embraced in our package.  Some ofthem are embraced with caveats.  So let me give you an example.
I think one of the proposals that has been focused on by the Republicans as a way to reducecosts is allowing insurance companies to sell across state lines.  We actually include that aspart of our approach.  But the caveat is, we've got to do so with some minimum standards,because otherwise what happens is that you could have insurance companies circumvent awhole bunch of state regulations about basic benefits or what have you, making sure that awoman is able to get mammograms as part of preventive care, for example.  Part of whatcould happen is insurance companies could go into states and cherry-pick and just get thosewho are healthiest and leave behind those who are least healthy, which would raiseeverybody's premiums who weren't healthy, right?
So it's not that many of these ideas aren't workable, but we have to refine them to make surethat they don't just end up worsening the situation for folks rather than making it better.
Now, what I said at the State of the Union is what I still believe:  If you can show me -- and ifI get confirmation from health care experts, people who know the system and how it works,including doctors and nurses -- ways of reducing people's premiums; covering those who donot have insurance; making it more affordable for small businesses; having insurance reformsthat ensure people have insurance even when they've got preexisting conditions, that theircoverage is not dropped just because they're sick, that young people right out of college or asthey're entering in the workforce can still get health insurance -- if those component parts arethings that you care about and want to do, I'm game.  And I've got -- and I've got a lot ofthese ideas.
The last thing I will say, though -- let me say this about health care and the health caredebate, because I think it also bears on a whole lot of other issues.  If you look at the packagethat we've presented -- and there's some stray cats and dogs that got in there that we wereeliminating, we were in the process of eliminating.  For example, we said from the start that itwas going to be important for us to be consistent in saying to people if you can have your -- ifyou want to keep the health insurance you got, you can keep it, that you're not going to haveanybody getting in between you and your doctor in your decision making.  And I think thatsome of the provisions that got snuck in might have violated that pledge.

And so we were in the process of scrubbing this and making sure that it's tight.  But at itscore, if you look at the basic proposal that we've put forward:  it has an exchange so thatbusinesses and the self-employed can buy into a pool and can get bargaining power the sameway big companies do; the insurance reforms that I've already discussed, making sure thatthere's choice and competition for those who don't have health insurance.  The componentparts of this thing are pretty similar to what Howard Baker, Bob Dole, and Tom Daschleproposed at the beginning of this debate last year.
Now, you may not agree with Bob Dole and Howard Baker, and, certainly you don't agree withTom Daschle on much, but that's not a radical bunch.  But if you were to listen to the debateand, frankly, how some of you went after this bill, you'd think that this thing was someBolshevik plot.  No, I mean, that's how you guys -- that's how you guys presented it.
And so I'm thinking to myself, well, how is it that a plan that is pretty centrist -- no, look, Imean, I'm just saying, I know you guys disagree, but if you look at the facts of this bill, mostindependent observers would say this is actually what many Republicans -- is similar to whatmany Republicans proposed to Bill Clinton when he was doing his debate on health care.
So all I'm saying is, we've got to close the gap a little bit between the rhetoric and the reality. I'm not suggesting that we're going to agree on everything, whether it's on health care orenergy or what have you, but if the way these issues are being presented by the Republicansis that this is some wild-eyed plot to impose huge government in every aspect of our lives,what happens is you guys then don't have a lot of room to negotiate with me.
I mean, the fact of the matter is, is that many of you, if you voted with the administration onsomething, are politically vulnerable in your own base, in your own party.  You've givenyourselves very little room to work in a bipartisan fashion because what you've been tellingyour constituents is, this guy is doing all kinds of crazy stuff that's going to destroy America.
And I would just say that we have to think about tone.  It's not just on your side, by the way -
- it's on our side, as well.  This is part of what's happened in our politics, where we demonizethe other side so much that when it comes to actually getting things done, it becomes toughto do.
Mike [Pence].
Congressman Pence:  Dr. Tom Price from Georgia, and then we'll have one more after thatif your time permits, Mr. President.
President Obama:  You know, I'm having fun.
Congressman Pence:  Okay.

President Obama:  This is great.
Congressman Pence:  So are we.
Congressman Price:  Mr. President, thank you.  I want to stick on the general topic of healthcare, but ask a very specific question.  You have repeatedly said, most recently at the State ofthe Union, that Republicans have offered no ideas and no solutions.  In spite of the fact --
President Obama:  I don't think I said that.  What I said was, within the context of healthcare -- I remember that speech pretty well, it was only two days ago -- I said I welcome ideasthat you might provide.  I didn't say that you haven't provided ideas.  I said I welcome thoseideas that you'll provide.
Congressman Price:  Mr. President, multiple times, from your administration, there havecome statements that Republicans have no ideas and no solutions.  In spite of the fact thatwe've offered, as demonstrated today, positive solutions to all of the challenges we face,including energy and the economy and health care, specifically in the area of health care --this bill, H.R.3400, that has more co-sponsors than any health care bill in the House, is a billthat would provide health coverage for all Americans; would correct the significant insurancechallenges of affordability and preexisting; would solve the lawsuit abuse issue, which isn'taddressed significantly in the other proposals that went through the House and the Senate;would write into law that medical decisions are made between patients and families anddoctors; and does all of that without raising taxes by a penny.
But my specific question is, what should we tell our constituents who know that Republicanshave offered positive solutions to the challenges that Americans face and yet continue to hearout of the administration that we've offered nothing?
President Obama:  Tom, look, I have to say that on the -- let's just take the health caredebate.  And it's probably not constructive for us to try to debate a particular bill -- this isn'tthe venue to do it.  But if you say, "We can offer coverage for all Americans, and it won't costa penny," that's just not true.  You can't structure a bill where suddenly 30 million peoplehave coverage, and it costs nothing.  If --
Congressman Price:  Mr. President, can I -- and I understand that we're not interested indebating this bill, but what should we tell our constituents who know that we've offered thesesolutions and yet hear from the administration that we have offered nothing.
President Obama:  Let me -- I'm using this as a specific example, so let me answer yourquestion.  You asked a question; I want to answer it.

It's not enough if you say, for example, that we've offered a health care plan and I look up --this is just under the section that you've just provided me, or the book that you just providedme -- summary of GOP health care reform bill:  The GOP plan will lower health care premiumsfor American families and small businesses, addressing America's number-one priority forhealth reform.  I mean, that's an idea that we all embrace.  But specifically it's got to work.  Imean, there's got to be a mechanism in these plans that I can go to an independent healthcare expert and say, is this something that will actually work, or is it boilerplate?
If I'm told, for example, that the solution to dealing with health care costs is tort reform,something that I've said I am willing to work with you on, but the CBO or other experts say tome, at best, this could reduce health care costs relative to where they're growing by a coupleof percentage points, or save $5 billion a year, that's what we can score it at, and it will notbend the cost curve long term or reduce premiums significantly -- then you can't make theclaim that that's the only thing that we have to do.  If we're going to do multi-state insuranceso that people can go across state lines, I've got to be able to go to an independent healthcare expert, Republican or Democrat, who can tell me that this won't result in cherry-pickingof the healthiest going to some and the least healthy being worse off.
So I am absolutely committed to working with you on these issues, but it can't just be politicalassertions that aren't substantiated when it comes to the actual details of policy.  Becauseotherwise, we're going to be selling the American people a bill of goods.  I mean, the easiestthing for me to do on the health care debate would have been to tell people that what you'regoing to get is guaranteed health insurance, lower your costs, all the insurance reforms; we'regoing to lower the costs of Medicare and Medicaid and it won't cost anybody anything.  That'sgreat politics, it's just not true.
So there's got to be some test of realism in any of these proposals, mine included.  I've got tohold myself accountable, and guaranteed the American people will hold themselves -- will holdme accountable if what I'm selling doesn't actually deliver.
Congressman Price:  Mr. President, a point of clarification, what's in the Better Solutionsbook are all the legislative proposals that were offered --
President Obama:  I understand that.  I've actually read your bills.
Congressman Price:  -- throughout 2009.
President Obama:  I understand.
Congressman Price:  And so, rest assured the summary document you received is backedup by precisely the kind of detailed legislation that Speaker Pelosi and your administrationhave been busy ignoring for 12 months.

President Obama:  Well, Mike -- well, hold on, hold on a second.  No, no, no, no.  Hold on asecond, guys.
You know, Mike, I've read your legislation.  I mean, I take a look at this stuff -- and the goodideas we take.  But here's -- here's the thing -- here's the thing that I guess all of us have tobe mindful of, it can't be all or nothing, one way or the other.  And what I mean by that isthis:  If we put together a stimulus package in which a third of it are tax cuts that normallyyou guys would support, and support for states and the unemployed, and helping people stayon COBRA that your governors certainly would support -- Democrat or a Republican; and thenyou've got some infrastructure, and maybe there's some things in there that you don’t like interms of infrastructure, or you think the bill should have been $500 billion instead of $700billion or there's this provision or that provision that you don't like.  If there's uniformopposition because the Republican caucus doesn't get 100 percent or 80 percent of what youwant, then it's going to be hard to get a deal done.  That's because that's not how democracy works.
So my hope would be that we can look at some of these component parts of what we're doingand maybe we break some of them up on different policy issues.  So if the good congressmanfrom Utah has a particular issue on lobbying reform that he wants to work with us on, we maynot able to agree on a comprehensive package on everything but there may be somecomponent parts that we can work on.
You may not support our overall jobs package, but if you look at the tax credit that we'reproposing for small businesses right now, it is consistent with a lot of what you guys have saidin the past.  And just the fact that it's my administration that's proposing it shouldn't preventyou from supporting it.  That's my point.
Congressman Pence:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Peter Roskam from the great state ofIllinois.
President Obama:  Oh, Peter is an old friend of mine.
Congressman Roskam:  Hey, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Peter and I have had many debates.
Congressman Roskam:  Well, this won't be one.  Mr. President, I heard echoes today of thestate senator that I served with in Springfield and there was an attribute and a characteristicthat you had that I think served you well there.  You took on some very controversial subjects-- death penalty reform -- you and I --
President Obama:  Sure.  We worked on it together.

Congressman Roskam:  -- negotiated on.  You took on ethics reform.  You took on some bigthings.  One of the keys was you rolled your sleeves up, you worked with the other party, andultimately you were able to make the deal.  Now, here's an observation.
Over the past year, in my view, that attribute hasn't been in full bloom.  And by that I mean,you've gotten this subtext of House Republicans that sincerely want to come and be a part ofthis national conversation toward solutions, but they've really been stiff-armed by SpeakerPelosi.  Now, I know you're not in charge of that chamber, but there really is this dynamic of,frankly, being shut out.  When John Boehner and Eric Cantor presented last February to yousome substantive job creation, our stimulus alternative, the attack machine began tomarginalize Eric -- and we can all look at the articles -- as "Mr. No," and there was this prettydark story, ultimately, that wasn't productive and wasn't within this sort of framework thatyou're articulating today.
So here's the question.  Moving forward, I think all of us want to hit the reset button on2009.  How do we move forward?  And on the job creation piece in particular, you mentionedColombia, you mentioned Panama, you mentioned South Korea.  Are you willing to work withus, for example, to make sure those FTAs get called, that's no-cost job creation?  Andultimately, as you're interacting with world leaders, that's got to put more arrows in yourquiver, and that's a very, very powerful tool for us.  But the obstacle is, frankly, the politicswithin the Democratic caucus?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, Peter and I did work together effectively on a whole hostof issues.  One of our former colleagues is right now running for governor, on the Republicanside, in Illinois.  In the Republican primary, of course, they're running ads of him saying nicethings about me.  Poor guy.
Although that's one of the points that I made earlier.  I mean, we've got to be careful aboutwhat we say about each other sometimes, because it boxes us in in ways that makes itdifficult for us to work together, because our constituents start believing us.  They don't knowsometimes this is just politics what you guys -- or folks on my side do sometimes. 
So just a tone of civility instead of slash and burn would be helpful.  The problem we havesometimes is a media that responds only to slash-and-burn-style politics.  You don't get a lotof credit if I say, "You know, I think Paul Ryan is a pretty sincere guy and has a beautifulfamily."  Nobody is going to run that in the newspapers.
Question: [Inaudible]
President Obama:  And by the way, in case he's going to get a Republican challenge, I didn'tmean it.  Don't want to hurt you, man.

But on the specifics, I think both sides can take some blame for a sour climate on Capitol Hill. What I can do maybe to help is to try to bring Republican and Democratic leadership togetheron a more regular basis with me.  That's, I think, a failure on my part, is to try to foster bettercommunications even if there's disagreement.  And I will try to see if we can do more of thatthis year.  That's on the sort of the general issue.
On the specific issue of trade, you're right, there are conflicts within and fissures within theDemocratic Party.  I suspect there are probably going to be some fissures within theRepublican Party, as well.  I mean, you know, if you went to some of your constituencies,they'd be pretty suspicious about it, new trade agreements, because the suspicion is somehowthey're all one way.
So part of what we've been trying to do is to make sure that we're getting the enforcementside of this tight, make sure that if we've got a trade agreement with China or other countries,that they are abiding with it -- they're not stealing our intellectual property or making surethat their non-tariff barriers are lowered even as ours are opened up.  And my hope is, is thatwe can move forward with some of these trade agreements having built some confidence --not just among particular constituency groups, but among the American people -- that trade isgoing to be reciprocal; that it's not just going to be a one-way street.
You are absolutely right though, Peter, when you say, for example, South Korea is a great allyof ours.  I mean, when I visited there, there is no country that is more committed tofriendship on a whole range of fronts than South Korea.  What is also true is that theEuropean Union is about to sign a trade agreement with South Korea, which means right atthe moment when they start opening up their markets, the Europeans might get in therebefore we do.
So we've got to make sure that we seize these opportunities.  I will be talking more abouttrade this year.  It's going to have to be trade that combines opening their markets with anenforcement mechanism, as well as just opening up our markets.  I think that's somethingthat all of us would agree on.  Let's see if we can execute it over the next several years.  Allright, is that it?
Congressman Pence:  Jeb Hensarling, Texas.  And that will be it, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Jim [sic] is going to wrap things up?
Congressman Pence:  Yes, sir.
President Obama:  All right.
Congressman Hensarling:  Jeb, Mr. President.

President Obama:  How are you?
Congressman Hensarling:  I'm doing well.  Mr. President, a year ago I had an opportunityto speak to you about the national debt.  And something that you and I have in common is weboth have small children.
President Obama:  Absolutely.
Congressman Hensarling:  And I left that conversation really feeling your sincerecommitment to ensuring that our children, our nation's children, do not inherit anunconscionable debt.  We know that under current law, that government -- the cost ofgovernment is due to grow from 20 percent of our economy to 40 percent of our economy,right about the time our children are leaving college and getting that first job.
Mr. President, shortly after that conversation a year ago, the Republicans proposed a budgetthat ensured that government did not grow beyond the historical standard of 20 percent ofGDP.  It was a budget that actually froze immediately non-defense discretionary spending.  Itspent $5 trillion less than ultimately what was enacted into law, and unfortunately, I believethat budget was ignored.  And since that budget was ignored, what were the old annualdeficits under Republicans have now become the monthly deficits under Democrats.  Thenational debt has increased 30 percent.
Now, Mr. President, I know you believe -- and I understand the argument, and I respect theview that the spending is necessary due to the recession; many of us believe, frankly, it's partof the problem, not part of the solution.  But I understand and I respect your view.  But this iswhat I don't understand, Mr. President.  After that discussion, your administration proposed abudget that would triple the national debt over the next 10 years -- surely you don't believe10 years from now we will still be mired in this recession -- and propose new entitlementspending and move the cost of government to almost 24.5 percent of the economy.
Now, very soon, Mr. President, you're due to submit a new budget.  And my question is --
President Obama:  Jeb, I know there's a question in there somewhere, because you'remaking a whole bunch of assertions, half of which I disagree with, and I'm having to sit herelistening to them.  At some point I know you're going to let me answer.  All right.
Congressman Hensarling:  That's the question.  You are soon to submit a new budget, Mr.President.  Will that new budget, like your old budget, triple the national debt and continue totake us down the path of increasing the cost of government to almost 25 percent of oureconomy?  That's the question, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Jeb, with all due respect, I've just got to take this last question as anexample of how it's very hard to have the kind of bipartisan work that we're going to do,because the whole question was structured as a talking point for running a campaign.

Now, look, let's talk about the budget once again, because I'll go through it with you line byline.  The fact of the matter is, is that when we came into office, the deficit was $1.3 trillion --$1.3 [trillion.]  So when you say that suddenly I've got a monthly budget that is higher thanthe -- a monthly deficit that's higher than the annual deficit left by the Republicans, that'sfactually just not true, and you know it's not true.
And what is true is that we came in already with a $1.3 trillion deficit before I had passed anylaw.  What is true is we came in with $8 trillion worth of debt over the next decade -- hadnothing to do with anything that we had done.  It had to do with the fact that in 2000 whenthere was a budget surplus of $200 billion, you had a Republican administration and aRepublican Congress, and we had two tax cuts that weren't paid for.
You had a prescription drug plan -- the biggest entitlement plan, by the way, in severaldecades -- that was passed without it being paid for.  You had two wars that were donethrough supplementals.  And then you had $3 trillion projected because of the lost revenue ofthis recession.  That's $8 trillion.
Now, we increased it by a trillion dollars because of the spending that we had to make on thestimulus.  I am happy to have any independent fact-checker out there take a look at yourpresentation versus mine in terms of the accuracy of what I just said.
Now, going forward, here's the deal.  I think, Paul, for example, head of the budgetcommittee, has looked at the budget and has made a serious proposal.  I've read it.  I can tellyou what's in it.  And there are some ideas in there that I would agree with, but there aresome ideas that we should have a healthy debate about because I don't agree with them.
The major driver of our long-term liabilities, everybody here knows, is Medicare and Medicaidand our health care spending.  Nothing comes close.  Social Security we could probably fix thesame way Tip O'Neill and Ronald Reagan sat down together and they could figure somethingout.  That is manageable.  Medicare and Medicaid -- massive problem down the road.  That'swhere -- that's going to be what our children have to worry about.
Now, Paul's approach -- and I want to be careful not simplifying this, because I know you'vegot a lot of detail in your plan -- but if I understand it correctly, would say we're going toprovide vouchers of some sort for current Medicare recipients at the current level --
Congressman Ryan:  No.
President Obama:  No?
Congressman Ryan:  People 55 and above --

President Obama:  Fifty-five and -- well, no, I understand.  I mean, there's a grandfatheringin, but just for future beneficiaries, right?  That's why I said I didn't want to -- I want to makesure that I'm not being unfair to your proposal, but I just want to point out that I've read it. And the basic idea would be that at some point we hold Medicare cost per recipient constantas a way of making sure that that doesn't go way out of whack, and I'm sure there are somedetails that --
Congressman Ryan:  We drew it as a blend of inflation and health inflation, the point of ourplan is -- because Medicare, as you know, is a $38 trillion unfunded liability -- it has to bereform for younger generations because it won't exist because it's going bankrupt.  And thepremise of our idea is, look, why not give people the same kind of health care plan we herehave in Congress?  That's the kind of reform we're proposing for Medicare.
President Obama:  No, I understand.  Right, right.  Well, look, as I said before, this is anentirely legitimate proposal.  The problem is twofold:  One is that depending on how it'sstructured, if recipients are suddenly getting a plan that has their reimbursement rates goinglike this, but health care costs are still going up like that, then over time the way we're savingmoney is essentially by capping what they're getting relative to their costs.
Now, I just want to point out -- and this brings me to the second problem -- when we made avery modest proposal as part of our package, our health care reform package, to eliminate thesubsidies going to insurance companies for Medicare Advantage, we were attacked across theboard, by many on your aisle, for slashing Medicare.  You remember?  We're going to startcutting benefits for seniors.  That was the story that was perpetrated out there -- scared thedickens out of a lot of seniors.
No, no, but here's my point.  If the main question is going to be what do we do aboutMedicare costs, any proposal that Paul makes will be painted, factually, from the perspectiveof those who disagree with it, as cutting benefits over the long term.  Paul, I don't think youdisagree with that, that there is a political vulnerability to doing anything that tinkers withMedicare.  And that's probably the biggest savings that are obtained through Paul's plan.
And I raise that not because we shouldn't have a series discussion about it.  I raise thatbecause we're not going to be able to do anything about any of these entitlements if what wedo is characterized, whatever proposals are put out there, as, well, you know, that's -- theother party is being irresponsible; the other party is trying to hurt our senior citizens; that theother party is doing X, Y, Z. 
That's why I say if we're going to frame these debates in ways that allow us to solve them,then we can't start off by figuring out, A, who's to blame; B, how can we make the Americanpeople afraid of the other side.  And unfortunately, that's how our politics works right now. And that's how a lot of our discussion works.  That's how we start off -- every time somebodyspeaks in Congress, the first thing they do, they stand up and all the talking points -- I seeFrank Luntz up here sitting in the front.

He's already polled it, and he said, you know, the way you're really going to -- I've done afocus group and the way we're going to really box in Obama on this one or make Pelosi lookbad on that one -- I know, I like Frank, we've had conversations between Frank and I.  Butthat's how we operate.  It's all tactics, and it's not solving problems.
And so the question is, at what point can we have a serious conversation about Medicare andits long-term liability, or a serious question about -- a serious conversation about SocialSecurity, or a serious conversation about budget and debt in which we're not simply trying toposition ourselves politically.  That's what I'm committed to doing.  We won't agree all thetime in getting it done, but I'm committed to doing it.
Congressman Pence:  Take one more?
President Obama:  You know, I've already gone over time.  But I'll be happy to take yourquestion, Congressman, offline.  You can give me a call.  All right, thank you, everybody.  Godbless you.  God bless the United States of America.  Thank you, everybody.