Good afternoon, everybody.  Have a seat.
Today, I had a chance to speak with John Boehner and congratulated Mitch McConnell onbecoming the next Senate Majority Leader.  And I told them both that I look forward tofinishing up this Congress’ business, and then working together for the next two years toadvance America’s business.  And I very much appreciated Leader McConnell’s words lastnight about the prospect of working together to deliver for the American people. On Friday, Ilook forward to hosting the entire Republican and Democratic leadership at the White House tochart a new course forward.
Obviously, Republicans had a good night, and they deserve credit for running goodcampaigns.  Beyond that, I’ll leave it to all of you and the professional pundits to pick throughyesterday’s results.  What stands out to me, though, is that the American people sent amessage, one that they’ve sent for several elections now.  They expect the people they electto work as hard as they do.  They expect us to focus on their ambitions and not ours.  Theywant us to get the job done.
All of us, in both parties, have a responsibility to address that sentiment.  Still, as President, Ihave a unique responsibility to try and make this town work.  So, to everyone who voted, Iwant you to know that I hear you.  To the two-thirds of voters who chose not to participate inthe process yesterday, I hear you, too.
  
All of us have to give more Americans a reason to feel like the ground is stable beneath theirfeet, that the future is secure, that there’s a path for young people to succeed, and that folkshere in Washington are concerned about them.  So I plan on spending every moment of thenext two-plus years doing my job the best I can to keep this country safe and to make surethat more Americans share in its prosperity.
This country has made real progress since the crisis six years ago.  The fact is moreAmericans are working; unemployment has come down.  More Americans have healthinsurance.  Manufacturing has grown.  Our deficits have shrunk.  Our dependence on foreignoil is down, as are gas prices.  Our graduation rates are up.  Our businesses aren’t justcreating jobs at the fastest pace since the 1990s, our economy is outpacing most of theworld.  But we’ve just got to keep at it until every American feels the gains of a growingeconomy where it matters most, and that's in their own lives.
Obviously, much of that will take action from Congress.  And I’m eager to work with the newCongress to make the next two years as productive as possible.  I'm committed to makingsure that I measure ideas not by whether they are from Democrats or Republicans, butwhether they work for the American people.  And that’s not to say that we won’t disagree oversome issues that we’re passionate about.  We will.  Congress will pass some bills I cannotsign.  I'm pretty sure I'll take some actions that some in Congress will not like.  That’snatural.  That's how our democracy works.  But we can surely find ways to work together onissues where there’s broad agreement among the American people.
So I look forward to Republicans putting forward their governing agenda.  I will offer my ideason areas where I think we can move together to respond to people’s economic needs.
So, just take one example.  We all agree on the need to create more jobs that pay well. Traditionally, both parties have been for creating jobs rebuilding our infrastructure -- ourroads, bridges, ports, waterways.  I think we can hone in on a way to pay for it through taxreform that closes loopholes and makes it more attractive for companies to create jobs here inthe United States.
We can also work together to grow our exports and open new markets for our manufacturersto sell more American-made goods to the rest of the world.  That's something I’ll be focusedon when I travel to Asia next week.
We all share the same aspirations for our young people.  And I was encouraged that this yearRepublicans agreed to investments that expanded early childhood education.  I think we'vegot a chance to do more on that front.  We’ve got some common ideas to help more youngpeople afford college and graduate without crippling debt so that they have the freedom to fillthe good jobs of tomorrow and buy their first homes and start a family.
  
And in the five states where a minimum wage increase was on the ballot last night, voterswent five for five to increase it. That will give about 325,000 Americans a raise in stateswhere Republican candidates prevailed.  So that should give us new reason to get it done foreverybody, with a national increase in the minimum wage.
So those are some areas where I think we've got some real opportunities to cooperate.  And Iam very eager to hear Republican ideas for what they think we can do together over the nextcouple of years.  Of course, there’s still business on the docket that needs attention this year. And here are three places where I think we can work together over the next several weeks,before this Congress wraps up for the holidays.
First, I’m submitting a request to Congress for funding to ensure that our doctors, scientists,and troops have the resources that they need to combat the spread of Ebola in Africa and toincrease our preparedness for any future cases here at home.
Second, I'm going to begin engaging Congress over a new Authorization to Use Military Forceagainst ISIL.  The world needs to know we are united behind this effort, and the men andwomen of our military deserve our clear and unified support.
Third, back in September, Congress passed short-term legislation to keep the governmentopen and operating into December.  That gives Congress five weeks to pass a budget for therest of the fiscal year.  And I hope that they’ll do it in the same bipartisan, drama-free waythat they did earlier this year.  When our companies are steadily creating jobs -- which theyare -- we don’t want to inject any new uncertainty into the world economy and to theAmerican economy.
The point is it’s time for us to take care of business.  There are things this country has to dothat can’t wait another two years or another four years.  There are plans this country has toput in place for our future.
And the truth is I’m optimistic about our future.  I have good reason to be.  I meet Americansall across the country who are determined, and big-hearted, and ask what they can do, andnever give up, and overcome obstacles.  And they inspire me every single day.  So the fact isI still believe in what I said when I was first elected six years ago last night.  For all the mapsplastered across our TV screens today, and for all the cynics who say otherwise, I continue tobelieve we are simply more than just a collection of red and blue states.  We are the UnitedStates.
And whether it's immigration or climate change, or making sure our kids are going to the bestpossible schools, to making sure that our communities are creating jobs; whether it's stoppingthe spread of terror and disease, to opening up doors of opportunity to everybody who’swilling to work hard and take responsibility -- the United States has big things to do.  We canand we will make progress if we do it together.  And I look forward to the work ahead.
  
So, with that, let me take some questions.  I think that our team has got my list.  And we'regoing to start with Julie Pace at Associated Press.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You said during this election that while your namewasn’t on the ballot, your policies were.  And despite the optimism that you’re expressinghere, last night was a devastating night for your party.  Given that, do you feel anyresponsibility to recalibrate your agenda for the next two years?  And what changes do youneed to make in your White House and in your dealings with Republicans in order to addressthe concerns that voters expressed with your administration?
President Obama:  Well, as I said in my opening remarks, the American peopleoverwhelmingly believe that this town doesn’t work well and that it is not attentive to theirneeds.  And as President, they, rightly, hold me accountable to do more to make it workproperly.  I’m the guy who’s elected by everybody, not just from a particular state or aparticular district.  And they want me to push hard to close some of these divisions, breakthrough some of the gridlock, and get stuff done.  So the most important thing I can do is justget stuff done, and help Congress get some things done. 
In terms of agenda items, though, Julie, if you look, as I just mentioned, to a minimum wageincrease, for example, that’s something I talked about a lot during the campaign.  Wherevoters had a chance to vote directly on that agenda item, they voted for it.  And so I think itwould be hard to suggest that people aren’t supportive of it.  We know that the surveysconsistently say they want to see that happen. 
The key is to find areas where the agenda that I’ve put forward, one that I believe will helpstrengthen the middle class and create more ladders of opportunity into the middle class, andimprove our schools, and make college more affordable to more young people, and make surethat we’re growing faster as an economy and we stay competitive -- the key is to make surethat those ideas that I have overlap somewhere with some of the ideas that Republicanshave. 
There’s not going to be perfect overlap.  I mean, there are going to be some ideas that I’vegot that I think the evidence backs up would be good for the economy; and Republicansdisagree. They’re not going to support those ideas.  But I’m going to keep on arguing for thembecause I think they’re the right thing for the country to do.  There are going to be someideas that they’ve got that they believe will improve the economy or create jobs that, from myperspective, isn’t going to help middle-class families improve their economic situation, so Iprobably won’t support theirs. 
But I do think there are going to be areas where we do agree -- on infrastructure, on makingsure that we’re boosting American exports.  And part of my task then is to reach out toRepublicans, make sure that I’m listening to them.  I’m looking forward to them puttingforward a very specific agenda in terms of what they would like to accomplish.
  
Let’s compare notes in terms of what I’m looking at and what they’re looking at, and let’s getstarted on those things where we agree.  Even if we don’t agree 100 percent, let’s get startedon those things where we agree 70, 80, 90 percent.  And if we can do that, and build up sometrust and improve how processes work in Washington, then I think that’s going to give theAmerican people a little bit more confidence that, in fact, their government is looking afterthem.
Question:  But is there anything specific that you feel like you and your administration needto change given this disastrous election for your party and the message that voters sent?
President Obama:  Julie, I think every single day I’m looking for, how can we do what weneed to do better.  Whether that is delivering basic services the government provides to theAmerican people; whether that is our capacity to work with Congress so that they’re passinglegislation; whether it’s how we communicate with the American people about what ourpriorities and vision is -- we are constantly asking ourselves questions about how do we makesure that we’re doing a better job.  And that’s not going to stop.  I think that every election isa moment for reflection, and I think that everybody in this White House is going to look andsay, all right, what do we need to do differently.
But the principles that we’re fighting for, the things that motivate me every single day andmotivate my staff every day -- those things aren’t going to change.  There’s going to be aconsistent focus on how do we deliver more opportunity to more people in this country; howdo we grow the economy faster; how do we put more people back to work.
And I maybe have a naïve confidence that if we continue to focus on the American people,and not on our own ambitions or image or various concerns like that, that at the end of theday, when I look back, I’m going to be able to say the American people are better off thanthey were before I was President.  And that’s my most important goal.
But the other thing I just want to emphasize is I’m -- I’ve said this before, I want to reiterateit -- if there are ideas that the Republicans have that I have confidence will make things betterfor ordinary Americans, the fact that the Republicans suggesting it as opposed to a Democrat,that will be irrelevant to me.  I want to just see what works.
And there are some things like rebuilding our infrastructure or early childhood education thatwe know works.  And I’m hoping that the kind of attitude and approach that Mitch McConnelland John Boehner have already expressed, their desire to get things done, allows us to findsome common ground.
Jeff Mason.
  
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  In 2010, you called the result of the midterm election“a shellacking.”  What do you call this?  And can you give us an update on your feelings aboutthe immigration executive order in the result -- in the aftermath of this election?  Does theelection affect your plans to release it?  Will it still -- is it likely to come out before the lameduck session is over?  And have you reduced its scope to just a couple million people? 
President Obama:  Well, as I said in my opening statement, there’s no doubt thatRepublicans had a good night.  And what we’re going to make sure that we do is to reach outto Mitch McConnell and John Boehner, who are now running both chambers in Congress, andfind out what their agenda is.  And my hope is, is that they’ve got some specific things theywant to do that correspond with some things that we want to get done.
What’s most important to the American people right now, the resounding message not just ofthis election, but basically the last several is:  Get stuff done.  Don't worry about the nextelection.  Don't worry about party affiliation.  Do worry about our concerns.  Worry about thefact that I’m a single mom, and at the end of the month it’s really hard for me to pay the bills,in part because I’ve got these huge child care costs.
Do worry about the fact that I’m a young person who’s qualified to go to college, but I’mreally worried about taking $50,000 a year out in debt and I don't know how I’d pay thatback.
Do worry about the fact that I’m a construction worker who has been working all my life, andI know that there’s construction work that should be done, but right now, for some reason,projects are stalled.
If we're thinking about those folks I think we're, hopefully, going to be able to get some stuffdone.
In terms of immigration, I have consistently said that it is my profound preference andinterest to see Congress act on a comprehensive immigration reform bill that wouldstrengthen our borders; would streamline our legal immigration system so that it works betterand we're attracting the best and the brightest from around the world; and that we give anopportunity for folks who’ve lived here, in many cases, for a very long time, may have kidswho are U.S. citizens, but aren’t properly documented -- give them a chance to pay their backtaxes, get in the back of the line, but get through a process that allows them to get legal.
The Senate, on a bipartisan basis, passed a good bill.  It wasn’t perfect, it wasn’t exactly whatI wanted, but it was a sound, smart, piece of legislation that really would greatly improve notjust our immigration system but our economy, and would improve business conditions here inthe United States -- and make sure that American-born workers aren’t undercut by workerswho are undocumented and aren’t always paid a fair wage and, as a consequence, employerswho are breaking the rules are able to undercut folks who are doing the right thing.
  
So we got a bipartisan bill out of the Senate.  I asked John Boehner at that point, can we passthis through the House?  There’s a majority of votes in the House to get this passed.  AndSpeaker Boehner I think was sincere about wanting to pass it, but had difficulty over the lastyear trying to get it done. 
So when he finally told me he wasn’t going to call it up this year, what I indicated to him is Ifeel obliged to do everything I can lawfully with my executive authority to make sure that wedon't keep on making the system worse, but that whatever executive actions that I take willbe replaced and supplanted by action by Congress.  You send me a bill that I can sign, andthose executive actions go away. 
That's a commitment I made not just to the American people  -- and to businesses and theevangelical community and the law enforcement folks and everybody who’s looked at thisissue and thinks that we need immigration reform -- that's a commitment that I also made toJohn Boehner, that I would act in the absence of action by Congress.
So before the end of the year, we're going to take whatever lawful actions that I can take thatI believe will improve the functioning of our immigration system that will allow us to surgeadditional resources to the border, where I think the vast majority of Americans have thedeepest concern.  And at the same time, I’ll be reaching out to both Mitch McConnell, JohnBoehner, and other Republican as well as Democratic leaders to find out how it is that theywant to proceed.  And if they want to get a bill done -- whether it’s during the lame duck ornext year -- I'm eager to see what they have to offer. 
But what I’m not going to do is just wait.  I think it’s fair to say that I’ve shown a lot ofpatience and have tried to work on a bipartisan basis as much as possible, and I’m going tokeep on doing so.  But in the meantime, let’s figure out what we can do lawfully throughexecutive actions to improve the functioning of the existing system.
Question:  How will you make sure that that executive action has teeth if Republicans try toblock it by blocking funding?  And can you give us a sense of whether or not you're thinkingabout  --
President Obama:  Jeff, I think if you want to get into the details of it, I suspect that when Iannounce that executive action, it will be rife with detail.  And I’m sure there will be a lot offollow-up questions. 
Chris Jansing. 
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I want to follow up on a couple of things and start withimmigration.  And are you concerned that if you sign an executive order on immigrationbefore the end of the year it will scuttle whatever chances there may be for there to be somesort of compromise on the issues that you talked about?
  
And I wonder that, given this unhappy electorate, clearly, and they seem to be disappointedwith both sides pretty much, why they punished the Democrats more than the Republicans byfar.
President Obama:  Well, as I said, when it comes to the political analysis, that’s your job. But what is also true is I am the President of the United States, and I think, understandably,people are going to ask for greater accountability and more responsibility from me than fromanybody else in this town.  Appropriately so, and I welcome that.  And the commitment that Iwill make to the American people and the way I’ve tried to conduct myself throughout thispresidency is that I’m going to wake up every single day doing my absolute best to deliver forthem. 
And there are areas where we’ve made real progress.  I think economically, I can look backand there is no doubt that almost  -- on almost every measure, we are better off economicallythan we were when I took office.  But what is also true is there are still a lot of folks out therewho are anxious and are hurting and are having trouble making ends meet, or are worriedabout their children’s future.  And it’s my job to give them some confidence that this town canwork to respond to some of those worries that folks have. 
And we haven’t done a good enough job convincing them of that.  And I understand that. They’ve been watching Washington over the last two, four years.  What they’ve seen is a lotof arguing and a lot of gridlock, but not a lot of concrete actions, at least legislatively, thathave made a difference in their lives.  And so we’ve got to make sure that we do a better job,and I’m committed to doing that.
On immigration, I know that concerns have been expressed that, well, if you do somethingthrough executive actions, even if it’s within your own authorities, that that will make itharder to pass immigration reform.  I just have to remind everybody I’ve heard that argumentnow for a couple of years.  This is an issue I actually wanted to get done in my first term, andwe didn’t see legislative action.  And in my second term, I made it my top legislative priority,and we got really good work done by a bipartisan group of senators, but it froze up in theHouse.
And I think that the best way if folks are serious about getting immigration reform done isgoing ahead and passing a bill and getting it to my desk.  And then the executive actions thatI take go away.  They’re superseded by the law that has passed.
And I will engage any member of Congress who’s interested in this in how we can shapelegislation that will be a significant improvement over the existing system.  But what we can’tdo is just keep on waiting.  There is a cost to waiting.  There’s a cost to our economy.  Itmeans that resources are misallocated. 
  
When the issue of unaccompanied children cropped up during this summer, there was a lot offolks who perceived this as a major crisis in our immigration system.  Now, the fact is, is thatthose numbers have now come down and they’re approximately where they were a year agoor two years ago or a year before that.  But it did identify a real problem in a certain portionof the border where we got to get more resources. 
But those resources may be misallocated, separating families right now that most of us, mostAmericans would say probably we’d rather have them just pay their back taxes, pay a fine,learn English, get to the back of the line, but we’ll give you a pathway where you can be legalin this country.
So where I’ve got executive authorities to do that, we should get started on that.  But I wantto emphasize once again, if, in fact, Republican leadership wants to see an immigration billpassed, they now have the capacity to pass it.  And hopefully engaging with me andDemocrats in both the House and the Senate, it’s a bill that I can sign because it addressesthe real concerns that are out there.  And the sooner they do it, from my perspective, thebetter.
Jonathan Karl.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Mitch McConnell has been the Republican Leader for sixyears, as long as you’ve been President.  But his office tells me that he has only met with youone-on-one once or twice during that entire six-year period.  So I’m wondering, as somebodywho came to Washington promising to end the hyper-partisanship that was here long beforeyou became President but has gotten worse since you got here, was it a mistake for you to doso little to develop relationships with Republicans in Congress?
President Obama:  I think that every day I’m asking myself, are there some things I can dobetter.  And I’m going to keep on asking that every single day.  The fact is that most of myinteractions with members of Congress have been cordial and they’ve been constructive. Oftentimes, though, we just haven’t been able to actually get what’s discussed in a leadershipmeeting through caucuses in the House and the Senate to deliver a bill.
The good news is that now Mitch McConnell and John Boehner are from the same party; Ithink they can come together and decide what their agenda is.  They’ve got sufficientmajorities to make real progress on some of these issues.  And I’m certainly going to bespending a lot more time with them now because that’s the only way that we’re going to beable to get some stuff done. 
And I take them at their word that they want to produce.  They’re in the majority; they needto present their agenda.  I need to put forward my best ideas.  I think the American peopleare going to be able to watch us and they’re paying attention to see whether or not we’reserious about actually compromising and being constructive.
  
And my commitment to them -- and I’ve said this when I spoke to them -- is, is thatanywhere where we can find common ground, I’m eager to pursue it.
Question:  Are you going to have that drink with Mitch McConnell now that you joked aboutat the White House Correspondents Dinner?
President Obama:  You know, actually, I would enjoy having some Kentucky bourbon withMitch McConnell.  I don’t know what his preferred drink is, but -- my interactions with MitchMcConnell, he has always been very straightforward with me. To his credit, he has nevermade a promise that he couldn’t deliver.  And he knows the legislative process well.  Heobviously knows his caucus well -- he has always given me, I think, realistic assessments ofwhat he can get through his caucus and what he can’t.  And so I think we can have aproductive relationship.
Phil Mattingly.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Another deadline coming up is your negotiators byNovember 24th have to figure out if they’re going to reach a deal with Iran on a nuclear area,a nuclear agreement.  I’m interested what your current perspective is on how thosenegotiations are going.  Also if it is your feeling that you have the power to implement anytype of agreement that's reached without any action from Congress?  And then, also I justwanted to quickly touch on the AUMF that you mentioned earlier.  Is that going to be more ofa codification of the limits that you've put in place for the mission up to this point?  Or whatshould we be looking for on that when you send it to the Hill?  Thank you.
President Obama:  On the AUMF, the leaders are going to be coming here on Friday.  It willbe an expanded group, not just the four leaders, but a larger group who all have an interest inthe issues we're discussing today.  And I’m actually going to invite Lloyd Austin, the CENTCOMCommander, to make a presentation about how our fight against ISIL is proceeding and Ithink to answer questions and assure that Congress is fully briefed on what we're doing there.
With respect to the AUMF, we’ve already had conversations with members of both parties inCongress, and the idea is to right-size and update whatever authorization Congress providesto suit the current fight, rather than previous fights. 
In 2001, after the heartbreaking tragedy of 9/11, we had a very specific set of missions thatwe had to conduct, and the AUMF was designed to pursue those missions.  With respect toIraq, there was a very specific AUMF.
We now have a different type of enemy.  The strategy is different.  How we partner with Iraqand other Gulf countries and the international coalition -- that has to be structureddifferently.  So it makes sense for us to make sure that the authorization from Congressreflects what we perceive to be not just our strategy over the next two or three months, butour strategy going forward.
  
And it will be a process of listening to members of Congress, as well as us presenting what wethink needs to be the set of authorities that we have.  And I’m confident we're going to beable to get that done.  And that may just be a process of us getting it started now.  It maycarry over into the next Congress.
On Iran, because of the unprecedented sanctions that we put in place that really did have acrippling effect on Iran’s economy, they’ve come to the table and they’ve negotiated seriouslyaround providing assurances that they're not developing a nuclear weapon for the first time. And they have abided by the interim rules.  We have been able to freeze their program, insome cases reduce the stockpile of nuclear material that they already had in hand.  And thediscussions, the negotiations have been constructive. 
The international community has been unified and cohesive.  There haven’t been a lot ofcracks in our alliance.  Even countries where we have some differences, like Russia, haveagreed with us and have worked with us cooperatively in trying to find ways to make sure thatwe can verify and have confidence going forward that Iran doesn't have the capacity todevelop a nuclear weapon that could not only threaten friends of ours like Israel, trigger anuclear arms race in the region, but could over the long term, potentially threaten us.
Whether we can actually get a deal done, we’re going to have to find out over the next threeto four weeks.  We have presented to them a framework that would allow them to meet theirpeaceful energy needs.  And if, in fact, what their leadership says, that they don’t want todevelop a nuclear a weapon -- if that is, in fact, true, then they’ve got an avenue here toprovide that assurance to the world community, and in a progressive, step-by-step, verifiableway, allow them to get out from under sanctions so that they can reenter as full-fledgedmembers of the international community.
But they have their own politics, and there’s a long tradition of mistrust between the twocountries.  And there’s a sizeable portion of the political elite that cut its teeth on anti-
Americanism and still finds it convenient to blame America for every ill that there is.  Andwhether they can manage to say yes to what clearly would be better for Iran, better for theregion, and better for the world, is an open question.  We’ll find out over the next severalweeks.
Question:  Sir, on whether or not you have the power unilaterally to relax sanctions toimplement an agreement?
President Obama:  There are a series of different sanctions.  There are multilateralsanctions; there are U.N. sanctions;  there are sanctions that have been imposed by us, thisadministration, unilaterally.  And I think it’s different for each of those areas.
  
But I don’t want to put the cart before the horse.  What I want to do is see if we, in fact, havea deal.  If we do have a deal that I have confidence will prevent Iran from getting a nuclearweapon, and that we can convince the world and the public will prevent Iran from getting anuclear weapon, then it will be time to engage in Congress.  And I think that we’ll be able tomake a strong argument to Congress that this is the best way for us to avoid a nuclear Iran;that it will be more effective than any other alternatives we might take, including militaryaction.
But that requires it being a good deal.  And I’ve said consistently that I’d rather have no dealthan a bad deal -- because what we don’t want to do is lift sanctions and provide Iranlegitimacy but not have the verifiable mechanisms to make sure that they don’t break out andproduce a nuclear weapon.
Ed Henry.  I missed you guys.  I haven't done this in a while.
Question:  I know, I’ve missed you.  Thank you, Mr. President.  I haven't heard you say aspecific thing during this news conference that you would do differently.  You’ve been asked ita few different ways.  I understand you’re going to reach out, but you’ve talked about doingthat before.  It’s almost like you’re doubling down on the same policies and approach you’vehad for six years.  So my question is, why not pull a page from the Clinton playbook andadmit you have to make a much more dramatic shift in course for these last two years?
And on ISIS, there was pretty dramatic setback in the last few days with it appearing that theSyrian rebels have been routed.  There are some Gitmo detainees who have rejoined thebattlefield, helping ISIS and other terror groups, is what the reports are suggesting.  So myquestion is, are we winning?
President Obama:  Well, I think it’s too early to say whether we are winning, because as Isaid at the outset of the ISIL campaign, this is going to be a long-term plan to solidify theIraqi government, to solidify their security forces, to make sure that in addition to air coverthat they have the capacity to run a ground game that pushes ISIL back from some of theterritories that they had taken, that we have a strong international coalition that we’ve nowbuilt, but that they are on the ground providing the training, providing the equipment,providing the supplies that are necessary for Iraqis to fight on behalf of their territory.
And what I also said was that in Syria that’s been complicated and that’s not going to besolved any time soon.  Our focus in Syria is not to solve the entire Syria situation, but ratherto isolate the areas in which ISIL can operate.  And there is no doubt that because of theextraordinary bravery of our men and women in uniform, and the precision of our pilots andthe strikes that have taken place, that ISIL is in a more vulnerable position and it is moredifficult for them to maneuver than it was previously. 
  
Now, there’s a specific issue about trying to get a moderate opposition in Syria that can serveas a partner with us on the ground.  That’s always been the hardest piece of business to getdone.  There are a lot of opposition groups in Syria along a spectrum from radical jihadistswho are our enemies to folks who believe in inclusive democracy, and everything in between. They fight among each other.  They are fighting the regime. 
And what we’re trying to do is to find a core group that we can work with that we haveconfidence in, that we’ve vetted, that can help in regaining territory from ISIL, and thenultimately serve as a responsible party to sit at the table in eventual political negotiations thatare probably some ways off in the future. 
That’s always been difficult.  As you know, one of the debates has consistently been, shouldthe Obama administration provide more support to the opposition?  Could that have avertedsome of the problems that are taking place in Syria?  And as I’ve said before, part of thechallenge is it’s a messy situation.  This is not a situation where we have one single unified,broad-based, effective, reliable --
Question:  -- the idea that maybe we have to have --
President Obama:  Let me answer the question, Ed.  And so what we are going to continueto test is, can we get a more stable, effective, cohesive, moderate opposition? 
But that’s not the sole measure of whether we are “winning” or not.  Remember, our firstfocus, Ed, here is to drive ISIL out of Iraq.  And what we’re doing in Syria is, first andforemost, in service of reducing ISIL’s capacity to resupply and send troops, and then runback over the Syrian border -- to eventually reestablish a border between Iraq and Syria sothat slowly Iraq regains control of its security and its territory.  That is our number-onemission.  That is our number-one focus. 
There are aspects of what’s going on in Syria that we’ve got to deal with in order to reducethe scope of ISIL’s operations.  So, for example, our support for Kurds in Kobani, wherethey’ve been able to hold off ISIL and where we’ve been able to effectively strike ISILpositions consistently -- that’s not just because we’re trying to solve a Syria problem.  That’salso because it gives us an opportunity to further weaken ISIL so that we can meet ournumber-one mission, which is Iraq. 
In terms of things to do differently, I guess, Ed, the question you’re asking is one actually Ithink I have answered.  If you’re asking about personnel, or if you’re asking about position onissues, or what have you, then it’s probably premature because I want to hear what --
Question:  Your leadership.  Is there something about your leadership --
  
President Obama:  Ed, what I’d like to do is to hear from the Republicans to find out what itis that they would like to see happen.  And what I’m committing to is making sure that I amopen to working with them on the issues where they think that there’s going to becooperation.
Now, that isn’t a change, because I’ve suggested to them before that where they think there’sareas of cooperation, I’d like to see us get some things done.  But the fact that they nowcontrol both chambers of Congress I think means that perhaps they have more confidencethat they can pass their agenda and get a bill on my desk.  It means that negotiations end upperhaps being a little more real because they have larger majorities, for example, in theHouse and they may be able to get some things through their caucuses that they couldn’tbefore.
But the bottom line that the American people want to know and that I’m going to repeat heretoday is that my number-one goal -- because I’m not running again, I’m not on the ballot, Idon’t have any further political aspirations -- my number-one goal is just to deliver as muchas I can for the American people in these last two years.  And wherever I see an opportunity,no matter how large or how small, to make it a little bit easier for a kid to go to college, makeit a little more likely that somebody is finding a good-paying job, make it a little more likelythat somebody has high-quality health care -- even if I’m not getting a whole loaf, I’minterested in getting whatever legislation we can get passed that adds up to improvedprospects and an improved future for the American people.
Sam Stein.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Following the elections, congressional Republicans arepushing once again for major reforms to your health care act.  In the past, you’ve said you’reopen to good ideas but you don’t want to undermine the bill.  Can you tell us what specificideas you’re ruling out?  Have the election results changed your calculus on reforming thelaw?  And how confident are you heading into the second enrollment period? And on a totallyunrelated matter -- have you settled on a nominee to replace Attorney General Eric Holder,and if so, who is it?
President Obama:  You guys want to spread out your news a little bit, don’t you?  You don’twant it all in just one big bang. 
On the attorney general, we have a number of outstanding candidates who we’re taking a lookat now, and in due course I will have an announcement.  And you’ll be there, Sam, whenthat’s announced.  But I’m confident that we’ll find somebody who is well-qualified, will elicitthe confidence of the American people, will uphold their constitutional obligations and rule oflaw, and will get confirmed by the Senate.
  
On health care, there are certainly some lines I’m going to draw.  Repeal of the law I won’tsign.  Efforts that would take away health care from the 10 million people who now have itand the millions more who are eligible to get it we're not going to support.  In some casesthere may be recommendations that Republicans have for changes that would undermine thestructure of the law, and I’ll be very honest with them about that and say, look, the lawdoesn't work if you pull out that piece or that piece.
On the other hand, what I have said is there’s no law that's ever been passed that is perfect. And given the contentious nature in which it was passed in the first place, there are placeswhere, if I were just drafting a bill on our own, we would have made those changes back then,and certainly as we’ve been implementing, there are some other areas where we think we cando even better.
So if, in fact, one of the items on Mitch McConnell’s agenda and John Boehner’s agenda is tomake responsible changes to the Affordable Care Act to make it work better, I’m going to bevery open and receptive to hearing those ideas.  But what I will remind them is that despiteall the contention, we now know that the law works.  You've got millions of people who havehealth insurance who didn't have it before.  You've got states that have expanded Medicaid tofolks who did not have it before, including Republican governors who’ve concluded this is agood deal for their state.
And despite some of the previous predictions, even as we’ve enrolled more people into theAffordable Care Act and given more people the security of health insurance, health careinflation has gone done every single year since the law passed, so that we now have thelowest increase in health care costs in 50 years, which is saving us about $180 billion inreduced overall costs to the federal government in the Medicare program.
So we are I think really proud of the work that's been done. But there’s no doubt that thereare areas where we can improve it.  So I’ll look forward to see what list they’ve got ofimprovements.
Question:  Is the individual mandate one of those lines you can't cross?
President Obama:  The individual mandate is a line I can't cross because the concept,borrowed from Massachusetts, from a law instituted by a former opponent of mine, MittRomney, understood that if you're providing health insurance to people through the privatemarketplace, then you've got to make sure that people can't game the system and just waituntil they get sick before they go try to buy health insurance.  You can't ensure that peoplewith preexisting conditions can get health insurance unless you also say, while you're healthy,before you need it, you've got to get health insurance. 
And obviously, there are hardship exemptions.  We understand that there are some folks who,even with the generous subsidies that have been provided, still can't afford it.  But that's acentral component of the law.
  
In terms of enrollment, we’ll do some additional announcements about that in the days tocome.  Starting in the middle of this month, people can sign up again.  I think there are anumber of people who the first time around sat on the sidelines in part because of our screw-
ups on healthcare.gov.
That's one area, Ed, by the way, that's very particular.  We're really making sure the websiteworks super well before the next open enrollment period.  We're double and triple-checkingit.  And so I think a lot of people who maybe initially thought we're not sure how this works,let’s wait and see -- they're going to have an opportunity now to sign up.  And what’s beenterrific is to see how more private insurers have come into the marketplace so that there’sgreater competition in more markets all around the country.  The premiums that have come inthat are available to people and the choices that are available are better than a lot of people Ithink had predicted. 
So the law is working.  That doesn’t mean it can’t be improved.
Major Garrett.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  And if you do miss us, allow me to humbly suggest wedo this every week.
President Obama:  We might.  Who knows.  I’m having a great time.
Question:  Let me go back to immigration.  Moments before you walked out here, sir, MitchMcConnell said -- and I quote -- that if you in fact use your executive authority to legalize acertain number of millions of undocumented workers, it would “poison the well” -- direct quote-- and it would be “like waving a red flag in front of a bull.”  Do you not believe that is theconsidered opinion of the new Republican majority in the House and Senate?  And do you alsonot believe what they have said in the aftermath of last night’s results that the verdictrendered by voters should stop you or should prevent you from taking this action because itwas a subtext in many of the campaigns?  Let me ask you a couple of specifics.  Republicanshaven’t made a mystery about some of the things they intend to say --
President Obama:  Do I have to write all of these down?
Question:  You’re very well familiar with these.  These will not be mysteries to you.
President Obama:  No, but I --
Question:  Keystone XL pipeline -- they will send you legislation on that.  They will ask you torepeal the medical device tax as a part of a funding mechanism of the Affordable Care Act.  
  
And they have said they would like to repatriate some maybe $2 trillion of offshore revenue atthe corporate level by reforming the corporate tax code without touching the individual taxcode.  To use your words, Mr. President, are any of those three lines you cannot cross andalso deal with what you perceive to be Republican attitudes about immigration?
President Obama:  All right.  I think, Major, that I answered the question on immigration.  Ihave no doubt that there will be some Republicans who are angered or frustrated by anyexecutive action that I may take.  Those are folks, I just have to say, who are also deeplyopposed to immigration reform in any form and blocked the House from being able to pass abipartisan bill. 
I have said before that I actually believe that John Boehner is sincere about wanting to getimmigration reform passed, which is why for a year I held off taking any action beyond whatwe had already done for the so-called DREAM kids, and did everything I could to give himspace and room to get something done.  And what I also said at the time was, if, in fact,Congress -- if this Congress could not get something done, then I would take furtherexecutive actions in order to make the system work better, understanding that any bill thatthey pass will supplant the executive actions that I take.
So I just want to reemphasize this, Major -- if, in fact, there is a great eagerness on the partof Republicans to tackle a broken immigration system, then they have every opportunity to doit.  My executive actions not only do not prevent them from passing a law that supersedesthose actions, but should be a spur for them to actually try to get something done.  And I amprepared to engage them every step of the way with their ideas.
I think we should have further broad-based debate among the American people.  As I’ve saidbefore, I do think that the episode with the unaccompanied children changed a lot ofattitudes.  I think what may also change a lot of attitudes is when the public now realizes thatthat was a very temporary and isolated event, and that, in fact, we have fewer illegalimmigrants coming in today than we did five years ago, 10 years ago or 20 years go, but thatwhat we also have is a system that is not serving our economy well.
Question:  -- Republicans who say the election was a referendum, at least in part, on yourintentions to use executive authority for immigration.
President Obama:  As I said before, I don’t want to try to read the tea leaves on electionresults.  What I am going to try to do as President is to make sure that I’m advancing what Ithink is best for the country.  And here’s an opportunity where I can use my administrativeauthorities, executive authorities, and lawfully try to make improvements on the existingsystem, understanding that that’s not going to fix the entire problem, and we’re much betteroff if we go ahead and pass a comprehensive bill.  And I hope that the Republicans really wantto get it passed.  If they do, they’re going to have a lot of cooperation from me.
  
So let me just tick off -- on Keystone, there’s an independent process.  It’s moving forward. And I’m going to let that process play out.  I’ve given some parameters in terms of how Ithink about it:  Ultimately, is this going to be good for the American people?  Is it going to begood for their pocketbook?  Is it going to actually create jobs?  Is it actually going to reducegas prices that have been coming down?  And is it going to be, on net, something that doesn’tincrease climate change that we’re going to have to grapple with?
There’s a pending case before a Nebraska judge about some of the citing.  The process ismoving forward.  And I’m just going to gather up the facts.
I will note, while this debate about Canadian oil has been raging -- keep in mind this isCanadian oil, this isn’t U.S. oil -- while that debate has been raging, we’ve seen some of thebiggest increases in American oil production and American natural gas production in ourhistory.  We are closer to energy independence than we’ve ever been before -- or at least aswe’ve been in decades.  We are importing less foreign oil than we produce for the first time ina very long time.  We’ve got a 100-year supply of natural gas that if we responsibly tap putsus in the strongest position when it comes to energy of any industrialized country around theworld.
When I travel to Asia or I travel to Europe, their biggest envy is the incredible homegrownU.S. energy production that is producing jobs and attracting manufacturing, because locatinghere means you’ve got lower energy costs. 
So our energy sector is booming.  And I’m happy to engage Republicans with additional ideasfor how we can enhance that.  I should note that our clean energy production is booming aswell. And so Keystone I just consider as one small aspect of a broader trend that’s reallypositive for the American people.
And let’s see -- okay, medical device tax.  I’ve already answered the question.  We are goingto take a look at whatever ideas -- let me take a look comprehensively at the ideas that theypresent.  Let’s give them time to tell me.  I’d rather hear it from them than from you.
Question:  For example --
President Obama:  Major --
Question:  I’m just telling you what they said.
President Obama:  Conceivably, I could just cancel my meeting on Friday because I’veheard everything from you.  I think I’d rather let Mitch McConnell --
Question:  I just asked if it was a line you couldn’t cross.
  
President Obama:  I’d rather hear from Mitch McConnell and John Boehner what ideasthey’d like to pursue, and we’ll have a conversation with them on that.
On repatriation, I said in my opening remarks that there is an opportunity for us to do a taxreform package that is good for business, good for jobs, and can potentially financeinfrastructure development here in the United States. 
Now, the devil is in the details.  So I think, conceptually, it’s something where we may havesome overlap, and I’m very interested in pursuing ideas that can put folks to work right nowon roads and bridges and waterways and ports, and a better air traffic control system.  If wehad one, by the way, we would reduce delays by about 30 percent.  We could reduce fuelcosts for airlines by about 30 percent.  And hopefully that would translate into cheaper airlinetickets, which I know everybody would be interested in.
So there’s all kind of work we can do on our infrastructure. This may be one mechanism thatRepublicans are comfortable in financing those kinds of efforts.  So that will be part of thediscussion that I think we’re prepared for on Friday and then in the weeks to come leadinginto the new Congress.
Whew.  Major works me, man. 
Jim Acosta.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I know you don’t want to read the tea leaves, but it isa fact that your party rejected you in these midterms.  By and large, they did not want youout on the campaign trail in these key battleground states.  How do you account for that? And your aides have said that this is the fourth quarter of your administration, but I don’tknow if you saw the morning talk shows, but there were several potential candidates for 2016who are out there already.  Is the clock ticking?  Are you running out of time?  How muchtime do you have left?  And what do you make of the notion that you’re now a lame duck?
President Obama:  Well, traditionally, after the last midterm of the two-term presidency,since I can’t run again, that’s the label that you guys apply. 
Here’s what I tell my team -- I told them this last week and I told them this this morning --we had this incredible privilege of being in charge of the most important organization onEarth, the U.S. government and our military, and everything that we do for good around theworld.
And there’s a lot of work to be done to make government work better, to make Americanssafer, to make opportunity available to more people, for us to be able to have a positiveinfluence in every corner of the globe -- the way we're doing right now in West Africa.  AndI’m going to squeeze every last little bit of opportunity to help make this world a better placeover these last two years.
  
And some of that is going to be what we can do administratively, and simple things like howdo we make customer service better in every agency.  Are there things we can do tostreamline how our veterans access care?  Are there better ways that we can makebusinesses understand the programs that are available to them to promote their business orexports? 
So there’s a whole bunch of stuff to do on that front.  And as I said before, there’s going to beopportunities to work with Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill to get laws done.  And ifyou look at the history of almost every President, those last two years, all kinds of stuffhappens; in some cases, stuff that we couldn’t predict. 
So the one thing I’m pretty confident about, Jim, is I’m going to be busy for the next twoyears.  And the one thing that I want the American people to be confident about is that everyday I’m going to be filling up my time trying to figure out how I can make their lives better. And if I’m doing that, at the end of my presidency, I’ll say, we played that fourth quarterwell.  And we played the game well. 
And the only difference between I guess basketball and politics is that the only score thatmatters is how did somebody else do, not how you did.  And that's the score I’m keeping.  AmI going to be able to look back and say, are more people working? Are there bank accountsbetter?  Are more kids going to college? Has housing improved?  Is the financial system morestable?  Are younger kids getting a better education?  Do we have greater energyindependence?  Is the environment cleaner?  Have we done something about climate change? Have we dealt with an ongoing terrorist threat and helped to bring about stability around theworld?  And those things -- every single day I’ve got an opportunity to make a difference onthose fronts, which is --
Question:  And you're not satisfied with where you are now?
President Obama:  Absolutely not.  I wouldn’t be satisfied as long as I’m meeting somebodywho has a -- doesn’t have a job and wants one.  I’m not going to be satisfied as long asthere’s a kid who writes me a letter and says, I got $60,000 worth of debt and I don’t knowhow to pay it back. 
And the American people aren’t satisfied.  So I want to do everything I can to deliver forthem.
Question:  And how about Democrats, the fact that they kept you out of these battlegroundstates?  Does that kind of bug you a little bit?
President Obama:  Listen, as I think some of you saw when I was out on the campaign trail,I love campaigning.  I love talking to ordinary people.  I love listening to their stories.  I loveshaking hands and getting hugs and just seeing the process of democracy and citizenshipmanifest itself during an election.
  
But I’m also a practical guy.  And ultimately, every candidate out there had to make their owndecisions about what they thought would be most helpful for them.  And I wanted to makesure that I’m respectful of their particular region, their particular state or congressionaldistrict, and if it was more helpful for them for me to be behind the scenes, I’m happy to do it.
Question:  You don't think it was a mistake?
President Obama:  I don’t have -- I’ll let other people analyze that.  But what I willemphasize is that one of the nice things about being in the sixth year of your presidency isyou’ve seen a lot of ups and downs and you’ve gotten more than your fair share of attention. And I’ve had the limelight, and there have been times where the request for my appearanceswere endless.  There have been times where, politically, we were down -- and it all kind ofevens out, which is why what’s most important I think is keeping your eye on the ball, andthat is are you actually getting some good done.
Scott Horsley, last question.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  You mentioned that where your policies actually wereon the ballot they often did better than members of your party.  Does that signal someshortcoming on your part or on the party’s part in framing this election and communicating tothe American people what it is that Democrats stand for?
President Obama:  I do think that one area where I know we’re constantly experimentingand trying to do better is just making sure that people know exactly what it is that we’retrying to accomplish and what we have accomplished in clear ways that people can -- thatunderstand how it affects them.  And I think the minimum wage I talked about a lot on thecampaign trail, but I’m not sure it penetrated well enough to make a difference. 
Part of what I also think we’ve got to look at is that two-thirds of people who were eligible tovote just didn’t vote.  One of the things that I’m very proud of in 2008 and 2012 when I ranfor office was we got people involved who hadn’t been involved before.  We got folks to votewho hadn’t voted before, particularly young people. 
And that was part of the promise and the excitement was if you get involved, if youparticipate, if you embrace that sense of citizenship, then things change -- and not just inabstract ways, they change in concrete ways.  Somebody gets a job who didn’t have itbefore.  Somebody gets health care who didn’t have it before.  Or a student is able to go tocollege who couldn’t afford it before.  And sustaining that, especially in midterm elections, hasproven difficult; sustaining that sense of, if you get involved and if you vote then there isgoing to be big change out there.  And partly I think when they look at Washington, they say,nothing is working and it’s not making a difference, and there’s just a constant slew of badnews coming over the TV screen, then you can understand how folks would get discouraged.
  
But it’s my job to figure this out as best I can.  And if the way we are talking about issues isn’tworking, then I’m going to try some different things.  If the ways that we’re approaching theRepublicans in Congress isn’t working, I’m going to try different things -- whether it’s having adrink with Mitch McConnell or letting John Boehner beat me again at golf, or weekly pressconferences -- I don’t know if that would be effective.  Whatever I think might make adifference in this, I’m going to be trying out up until my last day in office.
But I’ll close with what I said in my opening statement.  I am really optimistic about America. I know that runs counter to the current mood, but when you look at the facts, our economy isstronger than just about anybody’s.  Our energy production is better than just aboutanybody’s.  We’ve slashed our deficit by more than half.  More people have health insurance. Our businesses have the strongest balance sheets that they’ve had in decades.  Our youngpeople are just incredibly talented and gifted, and more of them are graduating from highschool, and more of them are going on to college, and more women are getting degrees andentering into the workforce.
And part of the reason I love campaigning is you travel around the country, folks are justgood.  They're smart and they're hardworking.  And they're not always paying a lot ofattention to Washington, and in some cases they’ve given up on Washington.  But theirimpulses are not sharply partisan, and their impulses are not ideological.  They're reallypractical, good, generous people. 
And we continue to be a magnet for the best and brightest from all around the world.  Wehave all the best cards relative to every other country on Earth.  Our armed forces, you talk tothem -- I had a chance this morning to just call some of our health service that is operating inLiberia, and the amount of hope and professionalism that they’ve brought has galvanized theentire country, and has built -- they’ve built a platform effectively for other countries suddenlyto start coming in.  And we're seeing real progress in fighting the disease in a country thatjust a month or a month and a half ago was desperate and had no hope.
So all that makes me optimistic.  And my job over the next couple of years is to do somepractical, concrete things -- as much as possible with Congress; where it’s not possible withCongress, on my own -- to show people why we should be confident, and to give people asense of progress and a sense of hope.
That doesn't mean there aren’t going to be ongoing nagging problems that are stubborn andcan't be solved overnight.  And probably the biggest one is the fact that despite economicgrowth, wages and income have still not gone up.  And that's a long-term trend that we’veseen for 10, 20, 30 years.  And it makes people worried about not just their own situation, butwhether their kids are going to be doing better than they did, which is the essence of theAmerican Dream.  I think there are some concrete things we can do to make sure that wagesand incomes do go up.  Minimum wage in those five states was a good start. 
  
But I think more than anything what I want to communicate over these next two years is thepromise and possibility of America.  This is just an extraordinary country.  And our democracyis messy.  And we're diverse and we're big.  And there are times where you're a politician andyou're disappointed with election results.  But maybe I’m just getting older -- I don't know.  Itdoesn't make me mopey.  It energizes me because it means that this democracy is working. And people in America were restless and impatient, and we want to get things done.  Andeven when things are going good, we want them to do better.  And that's why this is thegreatest country on Earth.  That's why I’m so privileged to have a chance to be President forthe next couple years.
All right?  Thank you, everybody.
