Good afternoon, everybody.  Secretary Clinton and I just concluded a meeting that focused onthe ongoing situation in Libya.  Over the last few days, my national security team has beenworking around the clock to monitor the situation there and to coordinate with ourinternational partners about a way forward.
First, we are doing everything we can to protect American citizens.  That is my highestpriority.  In Libya, we've urged our people to leave the country and the State Department isassisting those in need of support.  Meanwhile, I think all Americans should give thanks to theheroic work that's being done by our foreign service officers and the men and women servingin our embassies and consulates around the world.  They represent the very best of ourcountry and its values.
Now, throughout this period of unrest and upheaval across the region the United States hasmaintained a set of core principles which guide our approach.  These principles apply to thesituation in Libya.  As I said last week, we strongly condemn the use of violence in Libya.
The American people extend our deepest condolences to the families and loved ones of allwho’ve been killed and injured.  The suffering and bloodshed is outrageous and it isunacceptable. So are threats and orders to shoot peaceful protesters and further punish thepeople of Libya.  These actions violate international norms and every standard of commondecency.  This violence must stop.
  
The United States also strongly supports the universal rights of the Libyan people.  Thatincludes the rights of peaceful assembly, free speech, and the ability of the Libyan people todetermine their own destiny.  These are human rights.  They are not negotiable.  They mustbe respected in every country.  And they cannot be denied through violence or suppression.
In a volatile situation like this one, it is imperative that the nations and peoples of the worldspeak with one voice, and that has been our focus.  Yesterday a unanimous U.N. SecurityCouncil sent a clear message that it condemns the violence in Libya, supports accountabilityfor the perpetrators, and stands with the Libyan people.
This same message, by the way, has been delivered by the European Union, the Arab League,the African Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and many individual nations. North and south, east and west, voices are being raised together to oppose suppression andsupport the rights of the Libyan people.
I’ve also asked my administration to prepare the full range of options that we have to respondto this crisis.  This includes those actions we may take and those we will coordinate with ourallies and partners, or those that we’ll carry out through multilateral institutions.
Like all governments, the Libyan government has a responsibility to refrain from violence, toallow humanitarian assistance to reach those in need, and to respect the rights of its people. It must be held accountable for its failure to meet those responsibilities, and face the cost ofcontinued violations of human rights.
This is not simply a concern of the United States.  The entire world is watching, and we willcoordinate our assistance and accountability measures with the international community.  Tothat end, Secretary Clinton and I have asked Bill Burns, our Under Secretary of State forPolitical Affairs, to make several stops in Europe and the region to intensify our consultationswith allies and partners about the situation in Libya.
I’ve also asked Secretary Clinton to travel to Geneva on Monday, where a number of foreignministers will convene for a session of the Human Rights Council.  There she’ll holdconsultations with her counterparts on events throughout the region and continue to ensurethat we join with the international community to speak with one voice to the government andthe people of Libya.
And even as we are focused on the urgent situation in Libya, let me just say that our effortscontinue to address the events taking place elsewhere, including how the internationalcommunity can most effectively support the peaceful transition to democracy in both Tunisiaand in Egypt.
So let me be clear.  The change that is taking place across the region is being driven by thepeople of the region.  This change doesn’t represent the work of the United States or anyforeign power.  It represents the aspirations of people who are seeking a better life.
  
As one Libyan said, “We just want to be able to live like human beings.”  We just want to beable to live like human beings.  It is the most basic of aspirations that is driving this change. And throughout this time of transition, the United States will continue to stand up forfreedom, stand up for justice, and stand up for the dignity of all people.
Thank you very much.
