Good morning! It is wonderful to be back at the United States Military Academy -- the oldest continuouslyoccupied military post in America -- as we commission the newest officers in the United StatesArmy.
Thank you, General Hagenbeck, for your introduction, on a day that holds special meaning foryou and the Dean, General Finnegan. Both of you first came to West Point in the Class of 1971and went on to inspire soldiers under your command. You've led this Academy to a well-
deserved recognition: best college in America. And today, you're both looking forward to awell-deserved retirement from the Army. General Hagenbeck and Judy, General Finnegan andJoan, we thank you for 39 years of remarkable service to the Army and to America.
To the Commandant, General Rapp, the Academy staff and faculty, most of whom areveterans, thank you for your service and for inspiring these cadets to become the "leaders ofcharacter" they are today. Let me also acknowledge the presence of General Shinseki,Secretary McHugh, the members of Congress who are with us here today, including twoformer soldiers this Academy knows well, Senator Jack Reed and Congressman PatrickMurphy.
  
To all the families here -- especially all the moms and dads -- this day is a tribute to you aswell. The decision to come to West Point was made by your sons and daughters, but it wasyou who instilled in them a spirit of service that has led them to this hallowed place in a timeof war. So on behalf of the American people, thank you for your example and thank you foryour patriotism.
To the United States Corps of Cadets, and most of all, the Class of 2010 -- it is a singularhonor to serve as your Commander-in-Chief. As your Superintendent indicated, under ourconstitutional system my power as President is wisely limited. But there are some areas wheremy power is absolute. And so, as your Commander-in-Chief, I hereby absolve all cadets whoare on restriction for minor conduct offenses. I will leave the definition of "minor" -- to thosewho know better.
Class of 2010, today is your day -- a day to celebrate all that you've achieved, in the finesttradition of the soldier-scholar, and to look forward to the important service that lies ahead.
You have pushed yourself through the agony of Beast Barracks, the weeks of training in rainand mud, and, I'm told, more inspections and drills than perhaps any class before you. Alongthe way, I'm sure you faced a few moments when you asked yourself: "What am I doinghere?" I have those moments sometimes.
You've trained for the complexities of today's missions, knowing that success will be measurednot merely by performance on the battlefield, but also by your understanding of the culturesand traditions and languages in the place where you serve.
You've reached out across borders, with more international experience than any class inAcademy history. You've not only attended foreign academies to forge new friendships, you'vewelcomed into your ranks cadets from nearly a dozen countries.
You've challenged yourself intellectually in the sciences and the humanities, in history andtechnology. You've achieved a standard of academic excellence that is without question, tyingthe record for the most post-graduate scholarships of any class in West Point history.
This includes your number one overall cadet and your valedictorian -- Liz Betterbed and AlexRosenberg. And by the way, this is the first time in Academy history where your two topawards have been earned by female candidates.
This underscores a fact that I've seen in the faces of our troops from Baghdad to Bagram -- inthe 21st century, our women in uniform play an indispensable role in our national defense.And time and again, they have proven themselves to be role models for our daughters andour sons -- as students and as soldiers and as leaders in the United States armed forces.
  
And the faces in this stadium show a simple truth: America's Army represents the full breadthof America's experience. You come from every corner of our country -- from privilege andfrom poverty, from cities and small towns. You worship all of the great religions that enrichthe life of our people. You include the vast diversity of race and ethnicity that is fundamentalto our nation's strength.
There is, however, one thing that sets you apart. Here in these quiet hills, you've cometogether to prepare for the most difficult test of our time. You signed up knowing your servicewould send you into harm's way, and you did so long after the first drums of war weresounded. In you we see the commitment of our country, and timeless virtues that have servedour nation well.
We see your sense of duty -- including those who have earned their right shoulder patch --their right shoulder combat patches, like the soldier who suffered a grenade wound in Iraq,yet still helped his fellow soldiers to evacuate -- your First Captain of the Corps of Cadets,Tyler Gordy.
We see your sense of honor -- in your respect for tradition, knowing that you join a Long GreyLine that stretches through the centuries; and in your reverence for each other, as when theCorps stands in silence every time a former cadet makes the ultimate sacrifice for our nation.Indeed, today we honor the 78 graduates of this Academy who have given their lives for ourfreedom and our security in Iraq and Afghanistan.
And we see your love of country -- a devotion to America captured in the motto you chose asa class, a motto which will guide your lives of service: "Loyal 'Til the End."
Duty. Honor. Love of country. Everything you have learned here, all that you've achievedhere, has prepared you for today -- when you raise your right hand; when you take that oath;when your loved one or mentor pins those gold bars on your shoulders; when you become, atlong last, commissioned officers in the United States Army.
This is the ninth consecutive commencement that has taken place at West Point with ournation at war. This time of war began in Afghanistan -- a place that may seem as far awayfrom this peaceful bend in the Hudson River as anywhere on Earth. The war began onlybecause our own cities and civilians were attacked by violent extremists who plotted from adistant place, and it continues only because that plotting persists to this day.
For many years, our focus was on Iraq. And year after year, our troops faced a set ofchallenges there that were as daunting as they were complex. A lesser Army might have seenits spirit broken. But the American military is more resilient than that. Our troops adapted,they persisted, they partnered with coalition and Iraqi counterparts, and through theircompetence and creativity and courage, we are poised to end our combat mission in Iraq thissummer.
  
Even as we transition to an Iraqi lead and bring our troops home, our commitment to the Iraqipeople endures. We will continue to advise and assist Iraqi security forces, who are alreadyresponsible for security in most of the country. And a strong American civilian presence willhelp Iraqis forge political and economic progress. This will not be a simple task, but this iswhat success looks like: an Iraq that provides no haven to terrorists; a democratic Iraq that issovereign and stable and self-reliant.
And as we end the war in Iraq, though, we are pressing forward in Afghanistan. Six monthsago, I came to West Point to announce a new strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan. And Istand here humbled by the knowledge that many of you will soon be serving in harm's way. Iassure you, you will go with the full support of a proud and grateful nation.
We face a tough fight in Afghanistan. Any insurgency that is confronted with a direct challengewill turn to new tactics. And from Marja to Kandahar, that is what the Taliban has donethrough assassination and indiscriminate killing and intimidation. Moreover, any country thathas known decades of war will be tested in finding political solutions to its problems, andproviding governance that can sustain progress and serve the needs of its people.
So this war has changed over the last nine years, but it's no less important than it was inthose days after 9/11. We toppled the Taliban regime -- now we must break the momentumof a Taliban insurgency and train Afghan security forces. We have supported the election of asovereign government -- now we must strengthen its capacities. We've brought hope to theAfghan people -- now we must see that their country does not fall prey to our commonenemies. Cadets, there will be difficult days ahead. We will adapt, we will persist, and I haveno doubt that together with our Afghan and international partners, we will succeed inAfghanistan.
Now even as we fight the wars in front of us, we also have to see the horizon beyond thesewars -- because unlike a terrorist whose goal is to destroy, our future will be defined by whatwe build. We have to see that horizon, and to get there we must pursue a strategy of nationalrenewal and global leadership. We have to build the sources of America's strength andinfluence, and shape a world that's more peaceful and more prosperous.
Time and again, Americans have risen to meet and to shape moments of change. This is oneof those moments -- an era of economic transformation and individual empowerment; ofancient hatreds and new dangers; of emerging powers and new global challenges. And we'regoing to need all of you to help meet these challenges. You've answered the call. You, and allwho wear America's uniform, remain the cornerstone of our national defense, the anchor ofglobal security. And through a period when too many of our institutions have actedirresponsibly, the American military has set a standard of service and sacrifice that is as greatas any in this nation's history.
  
Now the rest of us -- the rest of us must do our part. And to do so, we must first recognizethat our strength and influence abroad begins with steps we take at home. We must educateour children to compete in an age where knowledge is capital, and the marketplace is global.We must develop clean energy that can power new industry and unbound us from foreign oiland preserve our planet. We have to pursue science and research that unlocks wonders asunforeseen to us today as the microchip and the surface of the moon were a century ago.
Simply put, American innovation must be the foundation of American power -- because at notime in human history has a nation of diminished economic vitality maintained its military andpolitical primacy. And so that means that the civilians among us, as parents and communityleaders, elected officials, business leaders, we have a role to play. We cannot leave it to thosein uniform to defend this country -- we have to make sure that America is building on itsstrengths.
As we build these economic sources of our strength, the second thing we must do is build andintegrate the capabilities that can advance our interests, and the common interests of humanbeings around the world. America's armed forces are adapting to changing times, but yourefforts have to be complemented. We will need the renewed engagement of our diplomats,from grand capitals to dangerous outposts. We need development experts who can supportAfghan agriculture and help Africans build the capacity to feed themselves. We needintelligence agencies that work seamlessly with their counterparts to unravel plots that runfrom the mountains of Pakistan to the streets of our cities. We need law enforcement that canstrengthen judicial systems abroad, and protect us here at home. And we need firstresponders who can act swiftly in the event of earthquakes and storms and disease.
The burdens of this century cannot fall on our soldiers alone. It also cannot fall on Americanshoulders alone. Our adversaries would like to see America sap its strength by overextendingour power. And in the past, we've always had the foresight to avoid acting alone. We werepart of the most powerful wartime coalition in human history through World War II. Westitched together a community of free nations and institutions to endure and ultimately prevailduring a Cold War.
Yes, we are clear-eyed about the shortfalls of our international system. But America has notsucceeded by stepping out of the currents of cooperation -- we have succeeded by steeringthose currents in the direction of liberty and justice, so nations thrive by meeting theirresponsibilities and face consequences when they don't.
So we have to shape an international order that can meet the challenges of our generation.We will be steadfast in strengthening those old alliances that have served us so well, includingthose who will serve by your side in Afghanistan and around the globe. As influence extendsto more countries and capitals, we also have to build new partnerships, and shape strongerinternational standards and institutions.
  
This engagement is not an end in itself. The international order we seek is one that canresolve the challenges of our times -- countering violent extremism and insurgency; stoppingthe spread of nuclear weapons and securing nuclear materials; combating a changing climateand sustaining global growth; helping countries feed themselves and care for their sick;preventing conflict and healing wounds. If we are successful in these tasks, that will lessenconflicts around the world. It will be supportive of our efforts by our military to secure ourcountry.
More than anything else, though, our success will be claimed by who we are as a country. Thisis more important than ever, given the nature of the challenges that we face. Our campaign todisrupt, dismantle, and to defeat al Qaeda is part of an international effort that is necessaryand just. But this is a different kind of war. There will be no simple moment of surrender to mark thejourney's end -- no armistice, no banner headline. Though we have had more success ineliminating al Qaeda leaders in recent months than in recent years, they will continue torecruit, and plot, and exploit our open society. We see that in bombs that go off in Kabul andKarachi. We see it in attempts to blow up an airliner over Detroit or an SUV in Times Square,even as these failed attacks show that pressure on networks like al Qaeda is forcing them torely on terrorists with less time and space to train. We see the potential duration of thisstruggle in al Qaeda's gross distortions of Islam, their disrespect for human life, and theirattempt to prey upon fear and hatred and prejudice.
So the threat will not go away soon, but let's be clear: Al Qaeda and its affiliates are smallmen on the wrong side of history. They lead no nation. They lead no religion. We need notgive in to fear every time a terrorist tries to scare us. We should not discard our freedomsbecause extremists try to exploit them. We cannot succumb to division because others try todrive us apart. We are the United States of America. We are the United States of America, andwe have repaired our union, and faced down fascism, and outlasted communism. We've gonethrough turmoil, we've gone through Civil War, and we have come out stronger -- and we willdo so once more.
And I know this to be true because I see the strength and resilience of the American people.Terrorists want to scare us. New Yorkers just go about their lives unafraid. Extremists want awar between America and Islam, but Muslims are part of our national life, including those whoserve in our United States Army. Adversaries want to divide us, but we are united by oursupport for you -- soldiers who send a clear message that this country is both the land of thefree and the home of the brave.
You know, in an age of instant access to information, a lot of cynicism in the news, it's easy tolose perspective in a flood of pictures and the swirl of political debate. Power and influence canseem to ebb and flow. Wars and grand plans can be deemed won or lost day to day, evenhour to hour.
  
As we experience the immediacy of the image of a suffering child or the boasts of a pridefuldictator, it's easy to give in to the belief sometimes that human progress has stalled -- thatevents are beyond our control, that change is not possible.
But this nation was founded upon a different notion. We believe, "that all men are createdequal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that amongthese are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." And that truth has bound us together, anation populated by people from around the globe, enduring hardship and achieving greatnessas one people. And that belief is as true today as it was 200 years ago. It is a belief that hasbeen claimed by people of every race and religion in every region of the world. Can anybodydoubt that this belief will be any less true -- any less powerful -- two years, two decades, oreven two centuries from now?
And so a fundamental part of our strategy for our security has to be America's support forthose universal rights that formed the creed of our founding. And we will promote thesevalues above all by living them -- through our fidelity to the rule of law and our Constitution,even when it's hard; even when we're being attacked; even when we're in the midst of war.
And we will commit ourselves to forever pursuing a more perfect union. Together with ourfriends and allies, America will always seek a world that extends these rights so that when anindividual is being silenced, we aim to be her voice. Where ideas are suppressed, we providespace for open debate. Where democratic institutions take hold, we add a wind at their back.When humanitarian disaster strikes, we extend a hand. Where human dignity is denied,America opposes poverty and is a source of opportunity. That is who we are. That is what wedo.
We do so with no illusions. We understand change doesn't come quick. We understand thatneither America nor any nation can dictate every outcome beyond its borders. We know that aworld of mortal men and women will never be rid of oppression or evil. What we can do, whatwe must do, is work and reach and fight for the world that we seek -- all of us, those inuniform and those who are not.
And in preparing for today, I turned to the world -- to the words of Oliver Wendell Holmes.And reflecting on his Civil War experience, he said, and I quote, "To fight out a war you mustbelieve in something and want something with all your might. So must you do to carryanything else to an end worth reaching." Holmes went on, "More than that, you must bewilling to commit yourself to a course, perhaps a long and hard one, without being able toforesee exactly where you will come out." America does not fight for the sake of fighting. We abhor war. As one who has neverexperienced the field of battle -- and I say that with humility, knowing, as General MacArthursaid, "The soldier above all others prays for peace" -- we fight because we must.
  
We fight to keep our families and communities safe. We fight for the security of our allies andpartners, because America believes that we will be safer when our friends are safer; that wewill be stronger when the world is more just.
So cadets, a long and hard road awaits you. You go abroad because your service isfundamental to our security back home. You go abroad as representatives of the values thatthis country was founded upon. And when you inevitably face setbacks -- when the fighting isfierce or a village elder is fearful; when the end that you are seeking seems uncertain -- thinkback to West Point.
Here, in this peaceful part of the world, you have drilled and you have studied and come ofage in the footsteps of great men and women -- Americans who faced times of trial, and whoeven in victory could not have foreseen the America they helped to build, the world theyhelped to shape.
George Washington was able to free a band of patriots from the rule of an empire, but hecould not have foreseen his country growing to include 50 states connecting two oceans.
Grant was able to save a union and see the slaves freed, but he could not have foreseen justhow much his country would extend full rights and opportunities to citizens of every color.
Eisenhower was able to see Germany surrender and a former enemy grow into an ally, but hecould not have foreseen the Berlin Wall coming down without a shot being fired.
Today it is your generation that has borne a heavy burden -- soldiers, graduates of thisAcademy like John Meyer and Greg Ambrosia who have braved enemy fire, protected theirunits, carried out their missions, earned the commendation of this Army, and of a gratefulnation.
From the birth of our existence, America has had a faith in the future -- a belief that wherewe're going is better than where we've been, even when the path ahead is uncertain. To fulfillthat promise, generations of Americans have built upon the foundation of our forefathers --finding opportunity, fighting injustice, forging a more perfect union. Our achievement wouldnot be possible without the Long Grey Line that has sacrificed for duty, for honor, for country.
And years from now when you return here, when for you the shadows have grown longer, Ihave no doubt that you will have added your name to the book of history. I have no doubtthat we will have prevailed in the struggles of our times. I have no doubt that your legacy willbe an America that has emerged stronger, and a world that is more just, because we areAmericans, and our destiny is never written for us, it is written by us, and we are ready tolead once more.
Thank you. May God bless you. And may God bless the United States of America.
