I just want to say a few words about the economy before I take your questions.
There are a lot of folks out there who are still struggling with the effects of the recession.Many people are still looking for work or looking for a job that pays more. Families arewondering how they'd deal with a broken refrigerator or a busted transmission, or how they'regoing to finance their kids' college education, and they're also worrying about the possibility oflayoffs.
The struggles of middle-class families were a big problem long before the recession hit in2007. They weren’t created overnight, and the truth is our economic challenges are not goingto be solved overnight. But there are more steps that we can take right now that would helpbusinesses create jobs here in America.
Today, our administration is trying to take those steps, so we're reviewing governmentregulations so that we can fix any rules in place that are an unnecessary burden onbusinesses. We’re working with the private sector to get small businesses and start-ups thefinancing they need to grow and expand. And because of the partnership that we’ve launchedwith businesses and community colleges, 500,000 workers will be able to receive the rightskills and training for manufacturing jobs in companies all across America -- jobs thatcompanies are looking to fill.
  
In addition to the steps that my administration can take on our own, there are also things thatCongress could do right now that will help create good jobs. Right now, Congress can send mea bill that would make it easier for entrepreneurs to patent a new product or idea -- becausewe can’t give innovators in other countries a big leg up when it comes to opening newbusinesses and creating new jobs. That's something Congress could do right now.
Right now, Congress could send me a bill that puts construction workers back on the jobrebuilding roads and bridges -- not by having government fund and pick every project, but byproviding loans to private companies and states and local governments on the basis of meritand not politics. That's pending in Congress right now. 
Right now, Congress can advance a set of trade agreements that would allow Americanbusinesses to sell more of their goods and services to countries in Asia and South America --agreements that would support tens of thousands of American jobs while helping thoseadversely affected by trade. That's pending before Congress right now. 
And right now, we could give middle-class families the security of knowing that the tax cut Isigned in December will be there for one more year. 
So there are a number of steps that my administration is taking, but there are also a numberof steps that Congress could be taking right now on items that historically have had bipartisansupport and that would help put more Americans back to work.
Many of these ideas have been tied up in Congress for some time. But, as I said, all of themenjoy bipartisan support, and all of them would help grow the economy. So I urge Congress toact on these ideas now.
Of course, one of the most important and urgent things we can do for the economy issomething that both parties are working on right now -- and that’s reducing our nation’sdeficit. Over the last few weeks, the Vice President has been leading negotiations withDemocrats and Republicans on this issue, and they’ve made some real progress in narrowingdown the differences. As of last week, both parties had identified more than 1 trillion dollarsworth of spending cuts already.
But everyone also knows that we’ll need to do more to close the deficit. We can’t get to the 4trillion dollars in savings that we need by just cutting the 12 percent of the budget that paysfor things like medical research and education funding and food inspectors and the weatherservice. And we can’t just do it by making seniors pay more for Medicare. So we’re going toneed to look at the whole budget, as I said several months ago. And we’ve got to eliminatewaste wherever we find it and make some tough decisions about worthy priorities.
  
And that means trimming the defense budget, while still meeting our security needs. It meanswe’ll have to tackle entitlements, as long as we keep faith with seniors and children withdisabilities by maintaining the fundamental security that Medicare and Medicaid provide. And,yes, we’re going to have to tackle spending in the tax code.
There’s been a lot of discussion about revenues and raising taxes in recent weeks, so I wantto be clear about what we’re proposing here. I spent the last two years cutting taxes forordinary Americans, and I want to extend those middle-class tax cuts. The tax cuts I’mproposing we get rid of are tax breaks for millionaires and billionaires; tax breaks for oilcompanies and hedge fund managers and corporate jet owners.
It would be nice if we could keep every tax break there is, but we’ve got to make some toughchoices here if we want to reduce our deficit. And if we choose to keep those tax breaks formillionaires and billionaires, if we choose to keep a tax break for corporate jet owners, if wechoose to keep tax breaks for oil and gas companies that are making hundreds of billions ofdollars, then that means we’ve got to cut some kids off from getting a college scholarship.That means we’ve got to stop funding certain grants for medical research. That means thatfood safety may be compromised. That means that Medicare has to bear a greater part of theburden. Those are the choices we have to make.
So the bottom line is this: Any agreement to reduce our deficit is going to require toughdecisions and balanced solutions. And before we ask our seniors to pay more for health care,before we cut our children’s education, before we sacrifice our commitment to the researchand innovation that will help create more jobs in the economy, I think it’s only fair to ask anoil company or a corporate jet owner that has done so well to give up a tax break that noother business enjoys. I don’t think that’s real radical. I think the majority of Americans agreewith that.
So the good news is, because of the work that’s been done, I this we can actually bridge ourdifferences. I think there is a conceptual framework that would allow us to make hugeprogress on our debt and deficit, and do so in a way that does not hurt our economy righthere and right now.
And it’s not often that Washington sees both parties agree on the scale and the urgency of thechallenge at hand. Nobody wants to put the creditworthiness of the United States in jeopardy.Nobody wants to see the United States default. So we’ve got to seize this moment, and wehave to seize it soon. The Vice President and I will continue these negotiations with bothleaders of both parties in Congress for as long as it takes, and we will reach a deal that willrequire our government to live within its means and give our businesses confidence and getthis economy moving.
So, with that, I will take your questions. I’ve got my list here. Starting off with Ben Feller,Associated Press.
  
Question: Thank you very much, Mr. President. I’d like to follow up on the comments youjust made as you try to reach a deal to raise the debt limit and cut the deficit. You keepsaying that there needs to be this balanced approach of spending cuts and taxes. ButRepublicans say flatly, they won’t --
President Obama: That they don’t want a balanced approach.
Question: They don’t want any tax increases, as they put it. And the House Speaker says notonly that he doesn’t support that, but that plan won’t -- will not pass the House. So myquestion is will you insist, ultimately, that a deal has to include those tax increases that youjust laid out? Is that an absolute red line for you? And if it is, can you explain to us how thatcan possibly get through the Congress?
President Obama: Look, I think that what we’ve seen in negotiations here in Washington isa lot of people say a lot of things to satisfy their base or to get on cable news, but thathopefully, leaders at a certain point rise to the occasion and they do the right thing for theAmerican people. And that’s what I expect to happen this time. Call me naïve, but myexpectation is that leaders are going to lead.
Now, I just want to be clear about what’s at stake here. The Republicans say they want toreduce the deficit. Every single observer who’s not an elected official, who’s not a politician,says we can’t reduce our deficit in the scale and scope that we need to without having abalanced approach that looks at everything.
Democrats have to accept some painful spending cuts that hurt some of our constituenciesand we may not like. And we’ve shown a willingness to do that for the greater good. To say,look, there are some things that are good programs that are nice to have; we can’t affordthem right now.
I, as Commander-in-Chief, have to have difficult conversations with the Pentagon saying, youknow what, there’s fat here; we’re going to have to trim it out. And Bob Gates has alreadydone a good job identifying 400 billion dollars in cuts, but we’re going to do more. And Ipromise you the preference of the Pentagon would not to cut any more, because they feel likethey’ve already given.
So we’re going to have to look at entitlements -- and that’s always difficult politically. But I’vebeen willing to say we need to see where we can reduce the cost of health care spending andMedicare and Medicaid in the out-years, not by shifting costs on to seniors, as some haveproposed, but rather by actually reducing those costs. But even if we’re doing it in a smartway, that's still tough politics. But it’s the right thing to do.
  
So the question is, if everybody else is willing to take on their sacred cows and do toughthings in order to achieve the goal of real deficit reduction, then I think it would be hard forthe Republicans to stand there and say that the tax break for corporate jets is sufficientlyimportant that we’re not willing to come to the table and get a deal done. Or, we’re soconcerned about protecting oil and gas subsidies for oil companies that are making moneyhand over fist -- that's the reason we’re not going to come to a deal.
I don't think that's a sustainable position. And the truth of the matter is, if you talk toRepublicans who are not currently in office, like Alan Simpson who co-chaired my bipartisancommission, he doesn’t think that's a sustainable position. Pete Domenici, Republican, co-
chaired something with Alice Rivlin, the Democrat, says that's -- he doesn’t think that's asustainable position. You can’t reduce the deficit to the levels that it needs to be reducedwithout having some revenue in the mix.
And the revenue we’re talking about isn’t coming out of the pockets of middle-class familiesthat are struggling. It’s coming out of folks who are doing extraordinarily well and areenjoying the lowest tax rates since before I was born.
If you are a wealthy CEO or a health -- hedge fund manager in America right now, your taxesare lower than they have ever been. They’re lower than they’ve been since the 1950s. Andyou can afford it. You’ll still be able to ride on your corporate jet; you’re just going to have topay a little more.
And if we -- I just want to emphasize what I said earlier. If we do not have revenues, thatmeans there are a bunch of kids out there who are not getting college scholarships. If we donot have those revenues, then the kinds of cuts that would be required might compromise theNational Weather Service. It means that we would not be funding critical medical research. Itmeans that food inspection might be compromised. And I’ve said to some of the Republicanleaders, you go talk to your constituents, the Republican constituents, and ask them are theywilling to compromise their kids’ safety so that some corporate jet owner continues to get atax break. And I’m pretty sure what the answer would be.
So we’re going to keep on having these conversations. And my belief is, is that the Republicanleadership in Congress will, hopefully sooner rather than later, come to the conclusion thatthey need to make the right decisions for the country; that everybody else has been willing tomove off their maximalist position -- they need to do the same.
Question: You think they'll ultimately give in?
President Obama: My expectation is that they’ll do the responsible thing.
Chuck Todd.
  
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. There have been a lot of questions about theconstitutionality -- constitutional interpretations of a few decisions you’ve made, so I’ll justsimply ask: Do you believe the War Powers Act is constitutional? Do you believe that the debtlimit is constitutional, the idea that Congress can do this? And do you believe that marriage isa civil right?
President Obama: Well, that was a hodgepodge. Chuck, we’re going to assign you to theSupreme Court, man.
I’m not a Supreme Court justice so I’m not going to -- putting my constitutional law professorhat on here. Let me focus on, initially, the issue of Libya. I want to talk about the substance ofLibya because there’s been all kinds of noise about process and congressional consultationand so forth. Let’s talk about concretely what’s happened.
Muammar Qaddafi, who, prior to Osama bin Laden, was responsible for more American deathsthan just about anybody on the planet, was threatening to massacre his people. And as partof an international coalition, under a U.N. mandate that is almost unprecedented, we went inand took out air defense systems so that an international coalition could provide a no-fly zone,could protect -- provide humanitarian protection to the people on the ground.
I spoke to the American people about what we would do. I said there would be no troops onthe ground. I said that we would not be carrying the lion’s share of this operation, but asmembers of NATO, we would be supportive of it because it’s in our national security interestand also because it’s the right thing to do.
We have done exactly what I said we would do. We have not put any boots on the ground.And our allies -- who, historically, we’ve complained aren’t willing to carry enough of the loadwhen it comes to NATO operations -- have carried a big load when it comes to these NATOoperations. And as a consequence, we’ve protected thousands of people in Libya; we have notseen a single U.S. casualty; there’s no risks of additional escalation. This operation is limitedin time and in scope.
So I said to the American people, here’s our narrow mission. We have carried out that narrowmission in exemplary fashion. And throughout this process we consulted with Congress. We’vehad 10 hearings on it. We’ve sent reams of information about what the operations are. I’vehad all the members of Congress over to talk about it. So a lot of this fuss is politics.
And if you look substantively at what we’ve done, we have done exactly what we said to do,under a U.N. mandate, and we have protected thousands of lives in the process. And as aconsequence, a guy who was a state sponsor of terrorist operations against the United Statesof America is pinned down and the noose is tightening around him.
  
Now, when you look at the history of the War Powers resolution, it came up after the VietnamWar in which we had half-a-million soldiers there, tens of thousands of lives lost, hundreds ofbillions of dollars spent -- and Congress said, you know what, we don’t want something likethat happening again. So if you’re going to start getting us into those kinds of commitmentsyou’ve got to consult with Congress beforehand.
And I think that such consultation is entirely appropriate. But do I think that our actions inany way violate the War Powers resolution? The answer is no. So I don’t even have to get tothe constitutional question. There may be a time in which there was a serious question as towhether or not the War Powers resolution -- act was constitutional. I don’t have to get to thequestion.
We have engaged in a limited operation to help a lot of people against one of the worsttyrants in the world -- somebody who nobody should want to defend -- and we should besending a unified message to this guy that he should step down and give his people a fairchance to live their lives without fear. And this suddenly becomes the cause célèbre for somefolks in Congress? Come on.
So you had, what, a three-parter? What are the other two?
Question: There is some question about the constitutionality of the War Powers Act.
President Obama: I’m just saying I don’t have to reach it. That’s a good legal answer.
Question: [Inaudible.]
President Obama: Let me start by saying that this administration, under my direction, hasconsistently said we cannot discriminate as a country against people on the basis of sexualorientation. And we have done more in the two and a half years that I’ve been in here thanthe previous 43 Presidents to uphold that principle, whether it’s ending “don’t ask, don’t tell,”making sure that gay and lesbian partners can visit each other in hospitals, making sure thatfederal benefits can be provided to same-sex couples. Across the board -- hate crimes -- wehave made sure that that is a central principle of this administration, because I think it’s acentral principle of America.
Now, what we’ve also done is we’ve said that DOMA, the Defense of Marriage Act, isunconstitutional. And so we’ve said we cannot defend the federal government poking its noseinto what states are doing and putting the thumb on the scale against same-sex couples.
What I’ve seen happen over the last several years, and what happened in New York last weekI think was a good thing, because what you saw was the people of New York having a debate,talking through these issues. It was contentious; it was emotional; but, ultimately, they madea decision to recognize civil marriage. And I think that’s exactly how things should work.
  
And so I think it is -- I think it is important for us to work through these issues -- becauseeach community is going to be different and each state is going to be different -- to workthrough them. In the meantime, we filed a -- we filed briefs before the Supreme Court thatsay we think that any discrimination against gays, lesbians, transgenders is subject toheightened scrutiny, and we don't think that DOMA is unconstitutional [sic]. And so I think thecombination of what states are doing, what the courts are doing, the actions that we’re takingadministratively, all are how the process should work.
Question: Are you at all uncomfortable that there could be different rules in different states,you know, and for somebody to make the argument that's what we saw during segregation --
President Obama: Chuck, I think what you’re seeing is a profound recognition on the part ofthe American people that gays and lesbians and transgender persons are our brothers, oursisters, our children, our cousins, our friends, our co-workers, and that they’ve got to betreated like every other American. And I think that principle will win out. It’s not going to beperfectly smooth, and it turns out that the President -- I’ve discovered since I’ve been in thisoffice -- can’t dictate precisely how this process moves. But I think we’re moving in a directionof greater equality and I think that’s a good thing.
Julianna.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. I only have a two-parter.
President Obama: Thanks.
Question: Are you concerned that the current debate over debt and deficits is preventing youfrom taking the kind of decisive and more balanced action needed to create jobs in thiscountry, which is the number one concern for Americans?
And also, one of the impediments to job growth that the business community repeatedly citesis the regulatory environment. So do you think that the NLRB complaint against Boeing, thatthis has created some of the -- is an example of the kinds of regulations that chill job growth,and also that you yourself have called “just plain dumb”?
President Obama: I think it’s important to understand that deficit reduction, debt reduction,should be part of an overall package for job growth over the long term. It’s not the only partof it, but it’s an important part of it.
President Obama: So as I mentioned at the top, I think it’s important for us to look atrebuilding our transportation infrastructure in this country. That could put people back to workright now -- construction workers back to work right now. And it would get done work thatAmerica needs to get done. We used to have the best roads, the best bridges, the bestairports. We don’t anymore. And that’s not good for our long-term competitiveness.
  
So we could put people to work right now and make sure that we’re in a good position to winthe future, as well. I think --
Question: -- spending and [inaudible.]
President Obama: I’m going to get to it. I think that it’s important for us to look at the taxcode and figure out, are there ways that we can simplify it and also build on the work thatwe’ve already done, for example, saying to small businesses or start-up businesses, you don'thave to pay capital gains when you’re in start-up mode, because we want you to get out thereand start a business. That's important. Making sure that SBA is helping to get financing tosmall businesses, that's important.
So there are a whole range of things that we can be doing. I think these trade deals will beimportant -- because right now South Korea, frankly, has a better deal when it comes to ourtrading relationship than we do. Part of the reason I want to pass this trade deal is you see awhole bunch of Korean cars here in the United States and you don't see any American cars inKorea. So let’s rebalance that trading relationship. That's why we should get this passed.
So there are a range of things that we could be doing right now. Deficit and debt reductionshould be seen as part of that overall process, because I think if businesses feel confident thatwe’ve got our act together here in Washington, that not only is the government not going todefault but we’re also preparing for a future in which the population is getting older and we’regoing to have more expenses on the Medicare side and Social Security, that businesses willfeel more confident about investing here in the United States of America.
So I don't think they’re contradictory. And as I’ve said before, certainly in my job, but I thinkCongress, as well, they’ve got to be able to walk and chew gum at the same time. So we canfocus on jobs at the same time as we’re focusing on debt and deficit reduction.
Now, one of the things that my administration has talked about is, is there, in fact, a bunch of-- a tangle of regulations out there that are preventing businesses from growing andexpanding as quickly as they should. Keep in mind that the business community is alwayscomplaining about regulations. When unemployment is at 3 percent and they're makingrecord profits, they're going to still complain about regulations because, frankly, they want tobe able to do whatever they think is going to maximize their profits.
I’ve got an obligation to make sure that we’re upholding smart regulations that protect our airand protect our water and protect our food. If you’re flying on a plane, you want to make surethat there are some regulations in place to assure safety in air travel, right? So there aresome core regulations that we’ve got to maintain.
  
But what I have done -- and this is unprecedented, by the way, no administration has donethis before -- is I’ve said to each agency, don't just look at current regulations -- or don't justlook at future regulations, regulations that we’re proposing, let’s go backwards and look atregulations that are already on the books, and if they don't make sense, let’s get rid of them.And we are in the process of doing that, and we’ve already identified changes that couldpotentially save billions of dollars for companies over the next several years. 
Now, you asked specifically about one decision that was made by the National Labor RelationsBoard, the NLRB, and this relates to Boeing. Essentially, the NLRB made a finding that Boeinghad not followed the law in making a decision to move a plant. And it’s an independentagency. It’s going before a judge. So I don't want to get into the details of the case. I don'tknow all the facts. That's going to be up to a judge to decide.
What I do know is this -- that as a general proposition, companies need to have the freedomto relocate. They have to follow the law, but that’s part of our system. And if they’re choosingto relocate here in the United States, that’s a good thing. And what it doesn’t make -- what Ithink defies common sense would be a notion that we would be shutting down a plant orlaying off workers because labor and management can’t come to a sensible agreement.
So my hope is, is that even as this thing is working its way through, everybody steps back fora second and says, look, if jobs are being created here in the United States, let’s make surethat we’re encouraging that. And we can’t afford to have labor and management fighting allthe time, at a time when we’re competing against Germany and China and other countriesthat want to sell goods all around the world. And obviously, the airplane industry is an areawhere we still have a huge advantage, and I want to make sure that we keep it.
Mark Lander.
Question: Thank you very much, Mr. President. Yesterday, Admiral McRaven testified beforeCongress that he was concerned that there wasn’t a clear procedure to be followed if aterrorist were captured alive abroad. The administration has also been clear that it doesn’twant to continue to send suspected terrorists to Guantanamo.
What message do you have for American men and women in uniform who are undertakingmissions, like the very risky one to capture and kill bin Laden, about what they should do inthe event that they capture someone alive? And does the lack of these clear procedures raisethe risk that forces might be more inclined to kill suspected terrorists in the field, rather thancapture them alive, thus depriving the U.S. of the intelligence that they could provide?
President Obama: Well, first of all, my top priority in each and every one of these situationsis to make sure that we’re apprehending those who would attack the United States; that weare getting all the intelligence that we can out of these individuals, in a way that’s consistent
  
with due process of law; and that we try them, we prosecute them, in a way that’s consistentwith rule of law.
And, frankly, there are going to be different dispositions of the case depending on thesituation. And there are going to be sometimes where a military commission may beappropriate. There are going to be some times where Article III courts are appropriate interms of prosecution. And we do have a process to work through all the agencies --Department of Defense, Department of Justice, FBI, anybody else who might be involved inthese kinds of operations -- to think through on a case-by-case basis how a particularindividual should be dealt with.
And I think that when it comes to our men and women in uniform who might be carrying outthese missions, the instructions are not going to be based on whether or not the lawyers cansort out how we detain them or how we prosecute them. Their mission is to make sure thatthey apprehend the individual; they do so safely with minimum risk to American lives. Andthat’s always going to be the priority, is just carrying out the mission. And that message issent consistently to our men and women in uniform anytime they start carrying out one ofthese missions.
But I think it’s important to understand, and the American people need to be assured thatanytime we initiate a mission like this, our top priorities are making sure this person is notable to carry out attacks against the United States and that we’re able to obtain actionableintelligence from those individuals. And so that mitigates against this danger that you’resuggesting that our main goal is going to be to kill these individuals as opposed to potentiallycapturing them. Okay?
Mike Emanuel, FOX.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. Last week when you gave your Afghanistan drawdownspeech, the word “victory,” in terms of the overall war in Afghanistan, was not in your speech.So I’m wondering, sir, if you can define for the 100,000 troops you have in harm’s way inAfghanistan “victory” in the war, and for their families, as well, sir.
President Obama: Well, I didn't use “victory” in my West Point speech, either. What I saidwas we can be successful in our mission, which is narrowly drawn, and that is to make surethat al Qaeda cannot attack the United States of America or our allies or our interestsoverseas, and to make sure that we have an Afghan government that -- and an Afghan peoplethat can provide for their own security.
We are being successful in those missions. And the reason that we’re in a position to drawdown 10,000 troops this year and a total of 33,000 troops by the end of next summer isprecisely because of the extraordinary work of our men and women in uniform. What they’vebeen able to do is to severely cripple al Qaeda’s capacities.
  
Obviously bin Laden got the most attention, but even before the bin Laden operation we haddecimated the middle ranks and some of the upper ranks of al Qaeda. They’re having a greatdeal of difficulty operating, a great deal of difficulty communicating and financing themselves,and we are going to keep the pressure on. And in part that's because of the extraordinarysacrifices that have been made by our men and women in uniform in Afghanistan.
What we’ve also been able to do is to ramp up the training of Afghan forces. So we’ve got anadditional 100,000 Afghan troops, both Army and police, that have been trained as aconsequence of this surge. And that is going to give the Afghans more capacity to defendthemselves because it is in our national interest to make sure that you did not have a collapseof Afghanistan in which extremist elements could flood the zone once again, and over time alQaeda might be in a position to rebuild itself. 
So what I laid out was a plan in which we are going to be drawing down our troops fromAfghanistan after 10 very long years and an enormous sacrifice by our troops. But we willdraw them in a -- draw them down in a responsible way that will allow Afghanistan to defenditself and will give us the operational capacity to continue to put pressure on al Qaeda untilthat network is entirely defeated.
Question: The attack on the Intercontinental Hotel yesterday, sir? And does that concern youthat Afghan forces may not be able to step up if these guys are able to attack a high-profiletarget in the nation’s capital?
President Obama: Well, keep in mind the drawdown hasn’t begun. So we understood thatAfghanistan is a dangerous place, that the Taliban is still active, and that there are still goingto be events like this on occasion. The question is, in terms of overall trend, is Afghanistancapacity increasing.
Kabul, for example, which contains a huge proportion of the Afghan population as a whole,has been largely policed by Afghan forces for quite some time. And they’ve done a reasonablygood job. Kabul is much safer than it was, and Afghan forces in Kabul are much more capablethan they were.
That doesn’t mean that there are not going to be events like this potentially taking place, andthat will probably go on for some time. Our work is not done. But as I said in my speech, thetide of war is receding. We have shifted to a transition phase. And much like we’ve seen inIraq, where we've drawn down our troops, the remainder of our troops will be coming out bythe end of this year, but Iraq has been able to maintain a democratic government and to tampdown violence there -- we think a similar approach makes sense in Afghanistan.
  
But even in Iraq, you still see the occasional attack. These are still countries that are diggingthemselves out of a lot of war, a lot of conflict. They’re dangerous places. And so they’re notgoing to be perfectly safe, even if we were there. But we can improve the chances for theAfghan people to defend themselves.
Jim Sciutto.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. You’re aware that Senators Kerry and McCain have aproposal on the Senate floor to give you the leeway to continue operations in Libya for afurther year. You’ve just said that this, from the beginning, has been an operation limited intime and scope. Initially you said days, not weeks. Are you prepared, are the American peopleprepared for this operation, with American support, to continue for a further year? And isthere any other definition of success than Qaddafi being removed from power?
President Obama: Well, first of all, Jim, just a slight correction. What I told the Americanpeople was that the initial phase where Americans were in the lead would take days, perhapsweeks. And that’s exactly what happened, right? I mean, after -- around two weeks, a littleless than two weeks, we had transitioned where NATO had taken full control of the operation.So promise made, promise kept.
Second, I think when you have the former Republican nominee for President, John McCain,and the former nominee for President on the Democratic side, John Kerry, coming together tosupport what we’re doing in Libya, that should tell the American people that this is important.And I very much appreciate their efforts in that regard.
Third, when it comes to our definitions of success, the U.N. mandate has said that we arethere to make sure that you do not see a massacre directed against Libyan civilians by theLibyan regime. The Libyan regime’s capacity has been greatly reduced as a consequence ofour operation. That’s already been successful. What we’ve seen both in the East and in theWest is that opposition forces have been able to mobilize themselves and start gettingorganized, and people are starting to see the possibility of a more peaceful future on thehorizon.
What is also true is, as long as Qaddafi is still presenting himself as the head of the Libyangovernment, and as long as he still controls large numbers of troops, the Libyan people aregoing to be in danger of counter-offensives and of retribution. So there is no doubt thatQaddafi stepping down from power is -- from the international community’s perspective --going to be the primary way that we can assure that the overall mission of Libya’s peoplebeing protected is accomplished.
  
And I just want to point out -- I know it's something you know -- the International CriminalCourt identified Qaddafi as having violated international law, having committed war crimes.What we’ve seen is reports of troops engaging in horrible acts, including potentially using rapeas a weapon of war. And so when you have somebody like that in charge of large numbers oftroops, I think it would be hard for us to feel confident that the Libyan people are going to beprotected unless he steps down.
Now, what that means, whether there’s the possibility of Libyans arriving at some sort ofpolitical settlement, that I think is something that ultimately the Libyan people are going tohave to make a decision about -- because the international community is there in service ofthat broader goal, of a peaceful Libya.
Question: Would you accept a political settlement with him involved as success from theAmerican perspective?
President Obama: I would accept him stepping down so that he is not directing armedforces against the Libyan people. He needs to step down. He needs to go.
Laura Meckler.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. In these debt talks, would you accept -- would you liketo see some sort of tax breaks aimed at stimulating the economy, even though that would ofcourse add to the deficit itself?
And I’d also like to follow up on one of your earlier answers about same-sex marriage. Yousaid that it’s a positive step that so many states, including New York, are moving towardsthat. Does that mean that you personally now do support same-sex marriage, putting asidewhat individual states decide? Is that your personal view?
President Obama: I’m not going to make news on that today. Good try, though.
And with respect to the deficit and debt talks and where we need to go, I do think it’simportant, since we’re looking at how do we reduce the debt and deficit both in a 10-yearwindow as well as beyond a 10-year window, to understand that one of the most importantthings we can do for debt and deficit reduction is to grow the economy.
And so if there are steps that in the short term may reduce the amount of cash in the treasurybut in the long term mean that we’re growing at 3.5 percent instead of 2.5 percent, thenthose ideas are worth exploring.
  
Obviously that was what we did in December during the lame duck session, when Democratsand Republicans came together and we said, you know what, a payroll tax cut makes sense inorder to boost the economy; unemployment insurance makes sense in order to boost theeconomy. All that stuff puts money in people’s pockets at a time when they’re still strugglingto dig themselves out of this recession. And so the American people have an extra thousanddollars, on average, in their pockets because of the tax cuts that we initiated. And that hashelped cushion some of the tough stuff that happened in the first six months of this year,including the effects on oil prices as a consequence of what happened in the Middle East aswell as what happened in Japan.
I think that it makes perfect sense for us to take a look at can we extend the payroll tax, forexample, an additional year, and other tax breaks for business investment that could make abig difference in terms of creating more jobs right now.
What we need to do is to restore business confidence and the confidence of the Americanpeople that we’re on track -- that we’re not going to get there right away, that this is a toughslog, but that we still are moving forward. And I think that it makes sense, as we’re looking atan overall package, to see, are there some things that we can do to sustain the recovery, solong as the overall package achieves our goals -- the goals that I set out, which is $4 trillionwithin a 10-to 12-year window, and making sure that we’re bending the costs of things likehealth care over the long term.
Question: I'm sorry, I know you don’t want to say anything further on the same-sexmarriage issue, but what you said before really led me to believe that that’s what is in yourpersonal mind. And I’m wondering what's the distinction you’re drawing.
President Obama: Laura, I think this has been asked and answered. I'll -- I'll just --I'll...keep on giving you the -- the same answer until I give you a different one, all right? Andthat won’t be today.
Question: That's going to be -- [inaudible.]
President Obama: Yes, exactly. I thought you’d like that one.
Antonieta Cádiz? There you are.
Question: Thank you very much, Mr. President. First, if you receive a mandatory E-verify billonly without legalization, are you planning to veto that deal?
And second, on Fast and Furious, members of Congress and the government of Mexico arestill waiting for answers. Are you planning to replace ATF leadership? And when can we expectthe results of the current investigation?
  
President Obama: On the second question, as you know, my attorney general has madeclear that he certainly would not have ordered gun running to be able to pass through intoMexico. The investigation is still pending. I’m not going to comment on a currentinvestigation. I’ve made very clear my views that that would not be an appropriate step bythe ATF, and we got to find out how that happened. As soon as the investigation is completed,I think appropriate actions will be taken.
With respect to E-verify, we need comprehensive immigration reform. I’ve said it before. I willsay it again. I will say it next week. And I’ll say it six months from now. We’ve got to have asystem that makes sure that we uphold our tradition as a nation of laws and that we alsouphold our tradition as a nation of immigrants. And that means tough border security, goingafter employers that are illegally hiring and exploiting workers, making sure that we also havea pathway for legal status for those who are living in the shadows right now.
We may not be able to get everything that I would like to see in a package, but we have tohave a balanced package. E-verify can be an important enforcement tool if it’s not riddled witherrors, if U.S. citizens are protected -- because what I don't want is a situation in whichemployers are forced to set up a system that they can’t be certain works. And we don't wantto expose employers to the risk where they end up rejecting a qualified candidate for a jobbecause the list says that that person is an illegal immigrant, and it turns out that the personisn’t an illegal immigrant. That wouldn’t be fair for the employee and would probably get theemployer in trouble as well.
So I think the goal right now is to let’s continue to see if we can perfect the E-verify system.Let’s make sure that we have safeguards in place to prevent the kind of scenarios that Italked about. But let’s also not lose sight of some of the other components to immigrationreform. For example, making sure that DREAM Act kids -- kids who have grown up here in theUnited States, think of themselves as Americans, who are not legal through no fault of theirown, and who are ready to invest and give back to our country and go to school and fight inour military and start businesses here -- let’s make sure that those kids can stay.
We need to have a more balanced approach than just a verification system.
Question: Mr. President -- Mr. President, you don't have any timeline for the [inaudible]
President Obama: I don’t have an answer as to whether the investigation is completed yet,and it wouldn’t be appropriate for me to comment on the investigation if I don’t -- if it’s notyet completed.
Jessica Yellin. Congratulations, your first question here.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President.
  
President Obama: No pressure. You’re going to do great.
Question: Thank you. Your administration has laid out four different dates by which you’vesaid that the debt ceiling must be raised or the U.S. would face potential dire consequences.Three of those dates have come and gone and we haven’t faced financial calamity. Some ofyour critics have argued that these are then scare tactics to force a deal. So why should theAmerican people believe that the August 2nd deadline is the final deadline by which a dealmust be raised? And would you also spell out for us what you believe will happen if the debtceiling is not raised by that date?
President Obama: Jessica, let’s be clear. We haven’t given out four different dates. We havegiven out dates that are markers for us getting into trouble. It’s the equivalent of you’redriving down the street and the yellow light starts flashing. The yellow light is flashing. Now, ithasn’t been a red light yet. So what Tim Geithner has said is, technically speaking, we’re in aposition now where we’re having to do a whole bunch of things to make sure that our bills arepaid.
By August 2nd, we run out of tools to make sure that all our bills are paid. So that is a harddeadline. And I want everybody to understand that this is a jobs issue. This is not anabstraction. If the United States government, for the first time, cannot pay its bills, if itdefaults, then the consequences for the U.S. economy will be significant and unpredictable.And that is not a good thing. 
We don’t know how capital markets will react. But if capital markets suddenly decide, youknow what, the U.S. government doesn’t pay its bills, so we’re going to start pulling ourmoney out, and the U.S. Treasury has to start to raise interest rates in order to attract moremoney to pay off our bills, that means higher interest rates for businesses; that means higherinterest rates for consumers. So all the headwinds that we’re already experiencing in terms ofthe recovery will get worse.
That’s not my opinion. I think that’s a consensus opinion. And that means that job growth willbe further stymied, it will be further hampered, as a consequence of that decision. So that’spoint number one.
Point number two, I want to address what I’ve been hearing from some quarters, which is,well, maybe this debt limit thing is not really that serious; we can just pay interest on thedebt. This idea has been floating around in some Republican circles.
This is the equivalent of me saying, you know what, I will choose to pay my mortgage, but I’mnot going to pay my car note. Or I’m going to pay my car note but I’m not going to pay mystudent loan. Now, a lot of people in really tough situations are having to make those toughdecisions. But for the U.S. government to start picking and choosing like that is not going toinspire a lot of confidence.
  
Moreover, which bills are we going to decide to pay? These guys have said, well, maybe wejust pay the interest on -- for bondholders. So are we really going to start paying interest toChinese who hold treasuries and we’re not going to pay folks their Social Security checks? Orwe’re not going to pay to veterans for their disability checks? I mean, which bills, whichobligations, are we going to say we don’t have to pay?
And last point I want to make about this. These are bills that Congress ran up. The money hasbeen spent. The obligations have been made. So this isn’t a situation -- I think the Americanpeople have to understand this -- this is not a situation where Congress is going to say, okay,we won’t -- we won’t buy this car or we won’t take this vacation. They took the vacation. Theybought the car. And now they’re saying maybe we don’t have to pay, or we don’t have to payas fast as we said we were going to, or -- that’s not how responsible families act. And we’rethe greatest nation on Earth, and we can’t act that way.
So this is urgent and it needs to get settled.
Question: So is August 2nd a yellow light or a red light?
President Obama: I think people should think of -- look, I’m the President of the UnitedStates and I want to make sure that I am not engaging in scare tactics. And I’ve tried to beresponsible and somewhat restrained so that folks don’t get spooked. 
August 2nd is a very important date. And there’s no reason why we can’t get this done now.We know what the options are out there. This is not a technical problem any longer. This is amatter of Congress going ahead and biting the bullet and making some tough decisions.Because we know what the decisions are. We've identified what spending cuts are possible.We've identified what defense cuts are possible. We've identified what health care cuts arepossible. We've identified what loopholes in the tax code can be closed that would also raiserevenue. We’ve identified what the options are. And the question now is are we going to stepup and get this done.
And, you know, Malia and Sasha generally finish their homework a day ahead of time. Malia is13, Sasha is 10.
Question: Impressive.
President Obama: It is impressive. They don’t wait until the night before. They’re not pullingall-nighters. They’re 13 and 10. Congress can do the same thing. If you know you’ve got to dosomething, just do it.
  
And I’ve got to say, I’m very amused when I start hearing comments about, well, thePresident needs to show more leadership on this. Let me tell you something. Right after wefinished dealing with the government shutdown, averting a government shutdown, I called theleaders here together. I said we’ve got to get done -- get this done. I put Vice President Bidenin charge of a process -- that, by the way, has made real progress -- but these guys havemet, worked through all of these issues. I met with every single caucus for an hour to an hourand a half each -- Republican senators, Democratic senators; Republican House, DemocraticHouse. I’ve met with the leaders multiple times. At a certain point, they need to do their job.
And so, this thing, which is just not on the level, where we have meetings and discussions,and we’re working through process, and when they decide they’re not happy with the fact thatat some point you’ve got to make a choice, they just all step back and say, well, you know,the President needs to get this done -- they need to do their job. 
Now is the time to go ahead and make the tough choices. That’s why they’re called leaders.And I’ve already shown that I’m willing to make some decisions that are very tough and willgive my base of voters further reason to give me a hard time. But it’s got to be done.
And so there’s no point in procrastinating. There’s no point in putting it off. We’ve got to getthis done. And if by the end of this week, we have not seen substantial progress, then I thinkmembers of Congress need to understand we are going to start having to cancel things andstay here until we get it done.
They're in one week, they're out one week. And then they're saying, Obama has got to stepin. You need to be here. I’ve been here. I’ve been doing Afghanistan and bin Laden and theGreek crisis. You stay here. Let’s get it done.
All right. I think you know my feelings about that.
Caren Bohan.
Question: Thank you, Mr. President. You talked about the payroll tax holiday and possiblyextending that. Are you worried, though, that by adding a discussion of short-term measureson the economy into these discussions about long-term deficit reductions that that maycomplicate the conversation and make it harder to pass a debt limit?
President Obama: I will -- let me put it this way. If we’ve got a good deal on debt anddeficit reduction that focuses not just on the 10-year window but also the long term, we willget it done. And then we can argue about some other things -- because I think that's veryimportant.
  
I will say that precisely because tough votes in Congress are often avoided, that it may makesense to also deal with something like a payroll tax cut at the same time -- because it doeshave budget implications and the American people need to know that we’re focused on jobsand not just on deficit reduction, even though, as I said, deficit reduction helps to serve thejob agenda. I think they want to have some confidence that we’ve got a plan that’s helpingright now.
But I don’t think it should be a complicating factor -- because if Mitch McConnell and JohnBoehner came to me and said, all right, we’re ready to make a deal, here’s a balancedapproach to debt and deficit reduction, but we want to argue about payroll tax cuts later,they’re not set to expire until the end of this year -- if that was a situation that theypresented, then I think we would have a serious conversation about that. I would not discountthat completely.
I do think that the steps that I talked about to deal with job growth and economic growthright now are vitally important to deficit reduction. Just as deficit reduction is important togrow the economy and to create jobs -- well, creating jobs and growing the economy alsohelps reduce the deficit. If we just increased the growth rate by one percentage point, thatwould drastically bring down the long-term projections of the deficit, because people arepaying more into the coffers and fewer people are drawing unemployment insurance. It makesa huge difference.
And this may be sort of a good place to wrap up. You know, every day I get letters from folksall around the country who show incredible resilience, incredible determination, but they arehaving a very, very tough time. They’re losing their homes. Some have lost their businesses.Some have lost work and have not been able to find jobs for months, maybe a year, maybe ayear and a half. And they feel some desperation. And some folks who are working just arehaving a tough time paying the bills because they haven’t seen their wages or incomes go upin 10 years, and the costs of everything else have gone up.
And every day that weighs on me. Every minute of every day that weighs on me. Because Iran for President precisely to make sure that we righted this ship and we start once againcreating a situation where middle-class families and people who aspire to be in the middleclass, if they’re working hard, then they’re living a better life.
Now, these structural changes in our economy that have been going on for a decade -- insome cases, longer -- they’re not going to be solved overnight. But we know what to do. Weknow that if we are educating our kids well, then they’re going to be more competitive. Weknow that if we are investing in things like infrastructure, it pays off.
I was in Alcoa, in Iowa, one of our most successful companies. They took a big hit during therecession, but they still invested 90 million dollars in new equipment in a plant that makesairplane wings and parts for automobiles. And they’ve bounced back. They’ve hired back alltheir people and are increasing market share because they made those investments.
  
Well, just like a company like Alcoa, America has got to make some investments. We knowthat we’ve got to get control of our deficit. There are some things that aren’t going to solve allour problems but can make progress right now. And the question is whether or not Democratsand Republicans are willing to put aside the expedience of short-term politics in order to get itdone.
And these folks are counting on us. They desperately want to believe that their leadership isthinking about them and not playing games. And I think that if all the leadership here inWashington has the faces and the stories of those families in mind, then we will solve thisdebt limit issue; we will put in place steps like a payroll tax cut and infrastructuredevelopment; we’ll continue to fund education; we’ll hold true to our commitment to ourseniors.
These are solvable problems, but it does require us just getting out of the short-term and,frankly, selfish approach that sometimes politics breeds. We’ve got to think a bit long term.
Thank you very much, everybody.
