Thank you very much. Thank you. Please, have a seat. Thank you very much. I want to beginby thanking Hillary Clinton, who has traveled so much these last six months that she isapproaching a new landmark -- one million frequent flyer miles. I count on Hillary every singleday, and I believe that she will go down as one of the finest Secretaries of State in ournation’s history.
The State Department is a fitting venue to mark a new chapter in American diplomacy. For sixmonths, we have witnessed an extraordinary change taking place in the Middle East and NorthAfrica. Square by square, town by town, country by country, the people have risen up todemand their basic human rights. Two leaders have stepped aside. More may follow. Andthough these countries may be a great distance from our shores, we know that our own futureis bound to this region by the forces of economics and security, by history and by faith.
Today, I want to talk about this change -- the forces that are driving it and how we canrespond in a way that advances our values and strengthens our security.
Now, already, we’ve done much to shift our foreign policy following a decade defined by twocostly conflicts. After years of war in Iraq, we’ve removed 100,000 American troops andended our combat mission there. In Afghanistan, we’ve broken the Taliban’s momentum, andthis July we will begin to bring our troops home and continue a transition to Afghan lead. Andafter years of war against al Qaeda and its affiliates, we have dealt al Qaeda a huge blow bykilling its leader, Osama bin Laden.
  
Bin Laden was no martyr. He was a mass murderer who offered a message of hate -- aninsistence that Muslims had to take up arms against the West, and that violence against men,women and children was the only path to change. He rejected democracy and individual rightsfor Muslims in favor of violent extremism; his agenda focused on what he could destroy -- notwhat he could build.
Bin Laden and his murderous vision won some adherents. But even before his death, al Qaedawas losing its struggle for relevance, as the overwhelming majority of people saw that theslaughter of innocents did not answer their cries for a better life. By the time we found binLaden, al Qaeda’s agenda had come to be seen by the vast majority of the region as a deadend, and the people of the Middle East and North Africa had taken their future into their ownhands.
That story of self-determination began six months ago in Tunisia. On December 17th, a youngvendor named Mohammed Bouazizi was devastated when a police officer confiscated his cart.This was not unique. It’s the same kind of humiliation that takes place every day in manyparts of the world -- the relentless tyranny of governments that deny their citizens dignity.Only this time, something different happened. After local officials refused to hear hiscomplaints, this young man, who had never been particularly active in politics, went to theheadquarters of the provincial government, doused himself in fuel, and lit himself on fire.
There are times in the course of history when the actions of ordinary citizens sparkmovements for change because they speak to a longing for freedom that has been building upfor years. In America, think of the defiance of those patriots in Boston who refused to paytaxes to a King, or the dignity of Rosa Parks as she sat courageously in her seat. So it was inTunisia, as that vendor’s act of desperation tapped into the frustration felt throughout thecountry. Hundreds of protesters took to the streets, then thousands. And in the face of batonsand sometimes bullets, they refused to go home -- day after day, week after week -- until adictator of more than two decades finally left power.
The story of this revolution, and the ones that followed, should not have come as a surprise.The nations of the Middle East and North Africa won their independence long ago, but in toomany places their people did not. In too many countries, power has been concentrated in thehands of a few. In too many countries, a citizen like that young vendor had nowhere to turn --no honest judiciary to hear his case; no independent media to give him voice; no crediblepolitical party to represent his views; no free and fair election where he could choose hisleader.
And this lack of self-determination -- the chance to make your life what you will -- has appliedto the region’s economy as well. Yes, some nations are blessed with wealth in oil and gas, andthat has led to pockets of prosperity. But in a global economy based on knowledge, based oninnovation, no development strategy can be based solely upon what comes out of the ground.Nor can people reach their potential when you cannot start a business without paying a bribe.
  
In the face of these challenges, too many leaders in the region tried to direct their people’sgrievances elsewhere. The West was blamed as the source of all ills, a half-century after theend of colonialism. Antagonism toward Israel became the only acceptable outlet for politicalexpression. Divisions of tribe, ethnicity and religious sect were manipulated as a means ofholding on to power, or taking it away from somebody else.
But the events of the past six months show us that strategies of repression and strategies ofdiversion will not work anymore. Satellite television and the Internet provide a window intothe wider world -- a world of astonishing progress in places like India and Indonesia andBrazil. Cell phones and social networks allow young people to connect and organize like neverbefore. And so a new generation has emerged. And their voices tell us that change cannot bedenied.
In Cairo, we heard the voice of the young mother who said, “It’s like I can finally breathefresh air for the first time.”
In Sanaa, we heard the students who chanted, “The night must come to an end.”
In Benghazi, we heard the engineer who said, “Our words are free now. It’s a feeling you can’texplain.”
In Damascus, we heard the young man who said, “After the first yelling, the first shout, youfeel dignity.” 
Those shouts of human dignity are being heard across the region. And through the moralforce of nonviolence, the people of the region have achieved more change in six months thanterrorists have accomplished in decades.
Of course, change of this magnitude does not come easily. In our day and age -- a time of 24-
hour news cycles and constant communication -- people expect the transformation of theregion to be resolved in a matter of weeks. But it will be years before this story reaches itsend. Along the way, there will be good days and there will bad days. In some places, changewill be swift; in others, gradual. And as we’ve already seen, calls for change may give way, insome cases, to fierce contests for power.
The question before us is what role America will play as this story unfolds. For decades, theUnited States has pursued a set of core interests in the region: countering terrorism andstopping the spread of nuclear weapons; securing the free flow of commerce and safe-
guarding the security of the region; standing up for Israel’s security and pursuing Arab-Israelipeace.
  
We will continue to do these things, with the firm belief that America’s interests are not hostileto people’s hopes; they’re essential to them. We believe that no one benefits from a nucleararms race in the region, or al Qaeda’s brutal attacks. We believe people everywhere would seetheir economies crippled by a cut-off in energy supplies. As we did in the Gulf War, we will nottolerate aggression across borders, and we will keep our commitments to friends andpartners.
Yet we must acknowledge that a strategy based solely upon the narrow pursuit of theseinterests will not fill an empty stomach or allow someone to speak their mind. Moreover,failure to speak to the broader aspirations of ordinary people will only feed the suspicion thathas festered for years that the United States pursues our interests at their expense. Giventhat this mistrust runs both ways -- as Americans have been seared by hostage-taking andviolent rhetoric and terrorist attacks that have killed thousands of our citizens -- a failure tochange our approach threatens a deepening spiral of division between the United States andthe Arab world.
And that’s why, two years ago in Cairo, I began to broaden our engagement based uponmutual interests and mutual respect. I believed then -- and I believe now -- that we have astake not just in the stability of nations, but in the self-determination of individuals. Thestatus quo is not sustainable. Societies held together by fear and repression may offer theillusion of stability for a time, but they are built upon fault lines that will eventually tearasunder.
So we face a historic opportunity. We have the chance to show that America values thedignity of the street vendor in Tunisia more than the raw power of the dictator. There must beno doubt that the United States of America welcomes change that advances self-
determination and opportunity. Yes, there will be perils that accompany this moment ofpromise. But after decades of accepting the world as it is in the region, we have a chance topursue the world as it should be.
Of course, as we do, we must proceed with a sense of humility. It’s not America that putpeople into the streets of Tunis or Cairo -- it was the people themselves who launched thesemovements, and it’s the people themselves that must ultimately determine their outcome.
Not every country will follow our particular form of representative democracy, and there willbe times when our short-term interests don’t align perfectly with our long-term vision for theregion. But we can, and we will, speak out for a set of core principles -- principles that haveguided our response to the events over the past six months: The United States opposes theuse of violence and repression against the people of the region. 
The United States supports a set of universal rights. And these rights include free speech, thefreedom of peaceful assembly, the freedom of religion, equality for men and women under therule of law, and the right to choose your own leaders -- whether you live in Baghdad orDamascus, Sanaa or Tehran.
  
And we support political and economic reform in the Middle East and North Africa that canmeet the legitimate aspirations of ordinary people throughout the region. Our support forthese principles is not a secondary interest. Today I want to make it clear that it is a toppriority that must be translated into concrete actions, and supported by all of the diplomatic,economic and strategic tools at our disposal.
Let me be specific. First, it will be the policy of the United States to promote reform across theregion, and to support transitions to democracy. That effort begins in Egypt and Tunisia,where the stakes are high -- as Tunisia was at the vanguard of this democratic wave, andEgypt is both a longstanding partner and the Arab world’s largest nation. Both nations can seta strong example through free and fair elections, a vibrant civil society, accountable andeffective democratic institutions, and responsible regional leadership. But our support mustalso extend to nations where transitions have yet to take place.
Unfortunately, in too many countries, calls for change have thus far been answered byviolence. The most extreme example is Libya, where Muammar Qaddafi launched a waragainst his own people, promising to hunt them down like rats. As I said when the UnitedStates joined an international coalition to intervene, we cannot prevent every injusticeperpetrated by a regime against its people, and we have learned from our experience in Iraqjust how costly and difficult it is to try to impose regime change by force -- no matter howwell-intentioned it may be.
But in Libya, we saw the prospect of imminent massacre, we had a mandate for action, andheard the Libyan people’s call for help. Had we not acted along with our NATO allies andregional coalition partners, thousands would have been killed. The message would have beenclear: Keep power by killing as many people as it takes. Now, time is working against Qaddafi.He does not have control over his country. The opposition has organized a legitimate andcredible Interim Council. And when Qaddafi inevitably leaves or is forced from power, decadesof provocation will come to an end, and the transition to a democratic Libya can proceed.
While Libya has faced violence on the greatest scale, it’s not the only place where leadershave turned to repression to remain in power. Most recently, the Syrian regime has chosenthe path of murder and the mass arrests of its citizens. The United States has condemnedthese actions, and working with the international community we have stepped up oursanctions on the Syrian regime -- including sanctions announced yesterday on President Assadand those around him.
The Syrian people have shown their courage in demanding a transition to democracy.President Assad now has a choice: He can lead that transition, or get out of the way. TheSyrian government must stop shooting demonstrators and allow peaceful protests. It mustrelease political prisoners and stop unjust arrests. It must allow human rights monitors tohave access to cities like Dara’a; and start a serious dialogue to advance a democratictransition. Otherwise, President Assad and his regime will continue to be challenged fromwithin and will continue to be isolated abroad.
  
So far, Syria has followed its Iranian ally, seeking assistance from Tehran in the tactics ofsuppression. And this speaks to the hypocrisy of the Iranian regime, which says it stand forthe rights of protesters abroad, yet represses its own people at home. Let’s remember thatthe first peaceful protests in the region were in the streets of Tehran, where the governmentbrutalized women and men, and threw innocent people into jail. We still hear the chants echofrom the rooftops of Tehran. The image of a young woman dying in the streets is still searedin our memory. And we will continue to insist that the Iranian people deserve their universalrights, and a government that does not smother their aspirations.
Now, our opposition to Iran’s intolerance and Iran’s repressive measures, as well as its illicitnuclear program and its support of terror, is well known. But if America is to be credible, wemust acknowledge that at times our friends in the region have not all reacted to the demandsfor consistent change -- with change that’s consistent with the principles that I’ve outlinedtoday. That’s true in Yemen, where President Saleh needs to follow through on hiscommitment to transfer power. And that’s true today in Bahrain.
Bahrain is a longstanding partner, and we are committed to its security. We recognize thatIran has tried to take advantage of the turmoil there, and that the Bahraini government has alegitimate interest in the rule of law.
Nevertheless, we have insisted both publicly and privately that mass arrests and brute forceare at odds with the universal rights of Bahrain’s citizens, and we will -- and such steps willnot make legitimate calls for reform go away. The only way forward is for the government andopposition to engage in a dialogue, and you can’t have a real dialogue when parts of thepeaceful opposition are in jail. The government must create the conditions for dialogue, andthe opposition must participate to forge a just future for all Bahrainis.
Indeed, one of the broader lessons to be drawn from this period is that sectarian divides neednot lead to conflict. In Iraq, we see the promise of a multiethnic, multi-sectarian democracy.The Iraqi people have rejected the perils of political violence in favor of a democratic process,even as they’ve taken full responsibility for their own security. Of course, like all newdemocracies, they will face setbacks. But Iraq is poised to play a key role in the region if itcontinues its peaceful progress. And as they do, we will be proud to stand with them as asteadfast partner.
So in the months ahead, America must use all our influence to encourage reform in theregion. Even as we acknowledge that each country is different, we need to speak honestlyabout the principles that we believe in, with friend and foe alike. Our message is simple: Ifyou take the risks that reform entails, you will have the full support of the United States. 
We must also build on our efforts to broaden our engagement beyond elites, so that we reachthe people who will shape the future -- particularly young people.
  
We will continue to make good on the commitments that I made in Cairo -- to build networksof entrepreneurs and expand exchanges in education, to foster cooperation in science andtechnology, and combat disease. Across the region, we intend to provide assistance to civilsociety, including those that may not be officially sanctioned, and who speak uncomfortabletruths. And we will use the technology to connect with -- and listen to -- the voices of thepeople.
For the fact is, real reform does not come at the ballot box alone. Through our efforts we mustsupport those basic rights to speak your mind and access information. We will support openaccess to the Internet, and the right of journalists to be heard -- whether it’s a big newsorganization or a lone blogger. In the 21st century, information is power, the truth cannot behidden, and the legitimacy of governments will ultimately depend on active and informedcitizens.
Such open discourse is important even if what is said does not square with our worldview. Letme be clear, America respects the right of all peaceful and law-abiding voices to be heard,even if we disagree with them. And sometimes we profoundly disagree with them.
We look forward to working with all who embrace genuine and inclusive democracy. What wewill oppose is an attempt by any group to restrict the rights of others, and to hold powerthrough coercion and not consent. Because democracy depends not only on elections, but alsostrong and accountable institutions, and the respect for the rights of minorities.
Such tolerance is particularly important when it comes to religion. In Tahrir Square, we heardEgyptians from all walks of life chant, “Muslims, Christians, we are one.” America will work tosee that this spirit prevails -- that all faiths are respected, and that bridges are built amongthem. In a region that was the birthplace of three world religions, intolerance can lead only tosuffering and stagnation. And for this season of change to succeed, Coptic Christians musthave the right to worship freely in Cairo, just as Shia must never have their mosquesdestroyed in Bahrain.
What is true for religious minorities is also true when it comes to the rights of women. Historyshows that countries are more prosperous and more peaceful when women are empowered.And that’s why we will continue to insist that universal rights apply to women as well as men -
- by focusing assistance on child and maternal health; by helping women to teach, or start abusiness; by standing up for the right of women to have their voices heard, and to run foroffice. The region will never reach its full potential when more than half of its population isprevented from achieving their full potential.
Now, even as we promote political reform, even as we promote human rights in the region,our efforts can’t stop there. So the second way that we must support positive change in theregion is through our efforts to advance economic development for nations that aretransitioning to democracy. 
  
After all, politics alone has not put protesters into the streets. The tipping point for so manypeople is the more constant concern of putting food on the table and providing for a family.Too many people in the region wake up with few expectations other than making it throughthe day, perhaps hoping that their luck will change. Throughout the region, many youngpeople have a solid education, but closed economies leave them unable to find a job.Entrepreneurs are brimming with ideas, but corruption leaves them unable to profit fromthose ideas.
The greatest untapped resource in the Middle East and North Africa is the talent of its people.In the recent protests, we see that talent on display, as people harness technology to movethe world. It’s no coincidence that one of the leaders of Tahrir Square was an executive forGoogle. That energy now needs to be channeled, in country after country, so that economicgrowth can solidify the accomplishments of the street. For just as democratic revolutions canbe triggered by a lack of individual opportunity, successful democratic transitions depend uponan expansion of growth and broad-based prosperity.
So, drawing from what we’ve learned around the world, we think it’s important to focus ontrade, not just aid; on investment, not just assistance. The goal must be a model in whichprotectionism gives way to openness, the reigns of commerce pass from the few to the many,and the economy generates jobs for the young. America’s support for democracy willtherefore be based on ensuring financial stability, promoting reform, and integratingcompetitive markets with each other and the global economy. And we’re going to start withTunisia and Egypt.
First, we’ve asked the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to present a plan atnext week’s G8 summit for what needs to be done to stabilize and modernize the economiesof Tunisia and Egypt. Together, we must help them recover from the disruptions of theirdemocratic upheaval, and support the governments that will be elected later this year. And weare urging other countries to help Egypt and Tunisia meet its near-term financial needs.
Second, we do not want a democratic Egypt to be saddled by the debts of its past. So we willrelieve a democratic Egypt of up to 1 billion dollars in debt, and work with our Egyptianpartners to invest these resources to foster growth and entrepreneurship. We will help Egyptregain access to markets by guaranteeing $1 billion in borrowing that is needed to financeinfrastructure and job creation. And we will help newly democratic governments recoverassets that were stolen.
Third, we’re working with Congress to create Enterprise Funds to invest in Tunisia and Egypt.And these will be modeled on funds that supported the transitions in Eastern Europe after thefall of the Berlin Wall. OPIC will soon launch a 2 billion dollars facility to support privateinvestment across the region. And we will work with the allies to refocus the European Bankfor Reconstruction and Development so that it provides the same support for democratictransitions and economic modernization in the Middle East and North Africa as it has inEurope.
  
Fourth, the United States will launch a comprehensive Trade and Investment PartnershipInitiative in the Middle East and North Africa. If you take out oil exports, this entire region ofover 400 million people exports roughly the same amount as Switzerland. So we will workwith the EU to facilitate more trade within the region, build on existing agreements to promoteintegration with U.S. and European markets, and open the door for those countries who adopthigh standards of reform and trade liberalization to construct a regional trade arrangement.And just as EU membership served as an incentive for reform in Europe, so should the visionof a modern and prosperous economy create a powerful force for reform in the Middle Eastand North Africa.
Prosperity also requires tearing down walls that stand in the way of progress -- the corruptionof elites who steal from their people; the red tape that stops an idea from becoming abusiness; the patronage that distributes wealth based on tribe or sect. We will helpgovernments meet international obligations, and invest efforts at anti-corruption -- by workingwith parliamentarians who are developing reforms, and activists who use technology toincrease transparency and hold government accountable. Politics and human rights; economicreform.
Let me conclude by talking about another cornerstone of our approach to the region, and thatrelates to the pursuit of peace.
For decades, the conflict between Israelis and Arabs has cast a shadow over the region. ForIsraelis, it has meant living with the fear that their children could be blown up on a bus or byrockets fired at their homes, as well as the pain of knowing that other children in the regionare taught to hate them. For Palestinians, it has meant suffering the humiliation of occupation,and never living in a nation of their own. Moreover, this conflict has come with a larger cost tothe Middle East, as it impedes partnerships that could bring greater security and prosperityand empowerment to ordinary people.
For over two years, my administration has worked with the parties and the internationalcommunity to end this conflict, building on decades of work by previous administrations. Yetexpectations have gone unmet. Israeli settlement activity continues. Palestinians have walkedaway from talks. The world looks at a conflict that has grinded on and on and on, and seesnothing but stalemate. Indeed, there are those who argue that with all the change anduncertainty in the region, it is simply not possible to move forward now.
I disagree. At a time when the people of the Middle East and North Africa are casting off theburdens of the past, the drive for a lasting peace that ends the conflict and resolves all claimsis more urgent than ever. That’s certainly true for the two parties involved.
For the Palestinians, efforts to delegitimize Israel will end in failure. Symbolic actions to isolateIsrael at the United Nations in September won’t create an independent state. Palestinianleaders will not achieve peace or prosperity if Hamas insists on a path of terror and rejection.And Palestinians will never realize their independence by denying the right of Israel to exist.
  
As for Israel, our friendship is rooted deeply in a shared history and shared values. Ourcommitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable. And we will stand against attempts to single itout for criticism in international forums. But precisely because of our friendship, it’s importantthat we tell the truth: The status quo is unsustainable, and Israel too must act boldly toadvance a lasting peace.
The fact is, a growing number of Palestinians live west of the Jordan River. Technology willmake it harder for Israel to defend itself. A region undergoing profound change will lead topopulism in which millions of people -- not just one or two leaders -- must believe peace ispossible. The international community is tired of an endless process that never produces anoutcome. The dream of a Jewish and democratic state cannot be fulfilled with permanentoccupation.
Now, ultimately, it is up to the Israelis and Palestinians to take action. No peace can beimposed upon them -- not by the United States; not by anybody else. But endless delay won’tmake the problem go away. What America and the international community can do is to statefrankly what everyone knows -- a lasting peace will involve two states for two peoples: Israelas a Jewish state and the homeland for the Jewish people, and the state of Palestine as thehomeland for the Palestinian people, each state enjoying self-determination, mutualrecognition, and peace.
So while the core issues of the conflict must be negotiated, the basis of those negotiations isclear: a viable Palestine, a secure Israel. The United States believes that negotiations shouldresult in two states, with permanent Palestinian borders with Israel, Jordan, and Egypt, andpermanent Israeli borders with Palestine. We believe the borders of Israel and Palestineshould be based on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps, so that secure and recognizedborders are established for both states. The Palestinian people must have the right to governthemselves, and reach their full potential, in a sovereign and contiguous state.
As for security, every state has the right to self-defense, and Israel must be able to defenditself -- by itself -- against any threat. Provisions must also be robust enough to prevent aresurgence of terrorism, to stop the infiltration of weapons, and to provide effective bordersecurity. The full and phased withdrawal of Israeli military forces should be coordinated withthe assumption of Palestinian security responsibility in a sovereign, non-militarized state. Andthe duration of this transition period must be agreed, and the effectiveness of securityarrangements must be demonstrated.
These principles provide a foundation for negotiations. Palestinians should know the territorialoutlines of their state; Israelis should know that their basic security concerns will be met. I’maware that these steps alone will not resolve the conflict, because two wrenching andemotional issues will remain: the future of Jerusalem, and the fate of Palestinian refugees. Butmoving forward now on the basis of territory and security provides a foundation to resolvethose two issues in a way that is just and fair, and that respects the rights and aspirations ofboth Israelis and Palestinians.
  
Now, let me say this: Recognizing that negotiations need to begin with the issues of territoryand security does not mean that it will be easy to come back to the table. In particular, therecent announcement of an agreement between Fatah and Hamas raises profound andlegitimate questions for Israel: How can one negotiate with a party that has shown itselfunwilling to recognize your right to exist? And in the weeks and months to come, Palestinianleaders will have to provide a credible answer to that question. Meanwhile, the United States,our Quartet partners, and the Arab states will need to continue every effort to get beyond thecurrent impasse.
I recognize how hard this will be. Suspicion and hostility has been passed on for generations,and at times it has hardened. But I’m convinced that the majority of Israelis and Palestinianswould rather look to the future than be trapped in the past. We see that spirit in the Israelifather whose son was killed by Hamas, who helped start an organization that brought togetherIsraelis and Palestinians who had lost loved ones. That father said, “I gradually realized thatthe only hope for progress was to recognize the face of the conflict.” We see it in the actionsof a Palestinian who lost three daughters to Israeli shells in Gaza. “I have the right to feelangry,” he said. “So many people were expecting me to hate. My answer to them is I shall nothate. Let us hope,” he said, “for tomorrow.”
That is the choice that must be made -- not simply in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, butacross the entire region -- a choice between hate and hope; between the shackles of the pastand the promise of the future. It’s a choice that must be made by leaders and by the people,and it’s a choice that will define the future of a region that served as the cradle of civilizationand a crucible of strife.
For all the challenges that lie ahead, we see many reasons to be hopeful. In Egypt, we see itin the efforts of young people who led protests. In Syria, we see it in the courage of thosewho brave bullets while chanting, “peaceful, peaceful.” In Benghazi, a city threatened withdestruction, we see it in the courthouse square where people gather to celebrate the freedomsthat they had never known. Across the region, those rights that we take for granted are beingclaimed with joy by those who are prying loose the grip of an iron fist.
For the American people, the scenes of upheaval in the region may be unsettling, but theforces driving it are not unfamiliar. Our own nation was founded through a rebellion against anempire. Our people fought a painful Civil War that extended freedom and dignity to those whowere enslaved. And I would not be standing here today unless past generations turned to themoral force of nonviolence as a way to perfect our union -- organizing, marching, protestingpeacefully together to make real those words that declared our nation: “We hold these truthsto be self-evident, that all men are created equal.”
Those words must guide our response to the change that is transforming the Middle East andNorth Africa -- words which tell us that repression will fail, and that tyrants will fall, and thatevery man and woman is endowed with certain inalienable rights.
  
It will not be easy. There’s no straight line to progress, and hardship always accompanies aseason of hope. But the United States of America was founded on the belief that peopleshould govern themselves. And now we cannot hesitate to stand squarely on the side of thosewho are reaching for their rights, knowing that their success will bring about a world that ismore peaceful, more stable, and more just.
Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you.
