Good afternoon, everybody.  This morning, I spoke with, and Vice President Biden spoke with,Mayor Joe Riley and other leaders of Charleston to express our deep sorrow over thesenseless murders that took place last night.
Michelle and I know several members of Emanuel AME Church.  We knew their pastor,Reverend Clementa Pinckney, who, along with eight others, gathered in prayer and fellowshipand was murdered last night.  And to say our thoughts and prayers are with them and theirfamilies, and their community doesn’t say enough to convey the heartache and the sadnessand the anger that we feel.  
Any death of this sort is a tragedy.  Any shooting involving multiple victims is a tragedy. There is something particularly heartbreaking about the death happening in a place in whichwe seek solace and we seek peace, in a place of worship.  
Mother Emanuel is, in fact, more than a church.  This is a place of worship that was foundedby African Americans seeking liberty.  This is a church that was burned to the ground becauseits worships -- worshipers worked to end slavery.  When there were laws banning all-blackchurch gatherings, they conducted services in secret.  When there was a nonviolentmovement to bring our country closer in line with our highest ideals, some of our brightestleaders spoke and led marches from this church’s steps.  This is a sacred place in the historyof Charleston and in the history of America.
  
The FBI is now on the scene with local police, and more of the Bureau’s best are on the way tojoin them.  The Attorney General has announced plans for the FBI to open a hate crimeinvestigation.  We understand that the suspect is in custody.  And I’ll let the best of lawenforcement do its work to make sure that justice is served.
Until the investigation is complete, I’m necessarily constrained in terms of talking about thedetails of the case.  But I don’t need to be constrained about the emotions that tragedies likethis raise.  I’ve had to make statements like this too many times.  Communities like this havehad to endure tragedies like this too many times.  We don’t have all the facts, but we do knowthat, once again, innocent people were killed in part because someone who wanted to inflictharm had no trouble getting their hands on a gun.  Now is the time for mourning and forhealing.  
But let’s be clear:  At some point, we as a country will have to reckon with the fact that thistype of mass violence does not happen in other advanced countries.  It doesn’t happen inother places with this kind of frequency.  And it is in our power to do something about it.  Isay that recognizing the politics in this town foreclose a lot of those avenues right now.  But itwould be wrong for us not to acknowledge it.  And at some point it’s going to be important forthe American people to come to grips with it, and for us to be able to shift how we think aboutthe issue of gun violence collectively.
The fact that this took place in a black church obviously also raises questions about a darkpart of our history.  This is not the first time that black churches have been attacked.  And weknow that hatred across races and faiths pose a particular threat to our democracy and ourideals.
The good news is I am confident that the outpouring of unity and strength and fellowship andlove across Charleston today, from all races, from all faiths, from all places of worshipindicates the degree to which those old vestiges of hatred can be overcome.  That, certainly,was Dr. King’s hope just over 50 years ago, after four little girls were killed in a bombing in ablack church in Birmingham, Alabama.  
He said they lived meaningful lives, and they died nobly.  “They say to each of us,” Dr. Kingsaid: 
...black and white alike, that we must substitute courage for caution.  They say to usthat we must be concerned not merely with [about] who murdered them, but about thesystem, the way of life, the philosophy which produced the murderers.  Their deathsays to us that we must work passionately and unrelentingly for the realization of theAmerican Dream.1
And if one will hold on, he will discover that God walks with him, and that God is ableto lift you from the fatigue of despair to the buoyancy of hope, and transform dark anddesolate valleys into sunlit paths of inner peace.2
  
Reverend Pinckney and his congregation understood that spirit.  Their Christian faithcompelled them to reach out not just to members of their congregation, or to members oftheir own communities, but to all in need.  They opened their doors to strangers who mightenter a church in search of healing or redemption.  
Mother Emanuel church and its congregation have risen before -- from flames, from anearthquake, from other dark times -- to give hope to generations of Charlestonians.  And withour prayers and our love, and the buoyancy of hope, it will rise again now as a place of peace.
Thank you.
1 King, M.L. (1963). Eulogy for the Martyred Children.
2 Ibid.
