Hola!  Buenos dias!  Please, please, everybody have a seat.  It is wonderful to be back in México -- lindo yquerido.  I bring with me the greetings and friendship of the people of the United States, including tens ofmillions of proud Mexican Americans.
This is my fourth visit to Mexico as President.  This is my second visit to this museum.  And each time thatI've come I’ve been inspired by your culture and by the beauty of this land, and most of all, by the Mexicanpeople.  You’ve been so kind and gracious to me.  You’ve welcomed my wife, Michelle, here.   You’vewelcomed our daughter, Malia, and her classmates to Oaxaca.  And as a proud father, I have to say thatMalia’s Spanish is getting very good.  It helps that she’s smarter than I am. And it’s an honor to be back in Mexico City -- one of the world’s great cities.  Es un placer estar entreamigos.
And it’s fitting that we gather at this great museum, which celebrates Mexico’s ancient civilizations and theirachievements in arts and architecture, medicine and mathematics.  In modern times, Mexico’s blend ofcultures and traditions found its expression in the murals of Rivera and the paintings of Frida, and the poetryof Sor Juana and the essays of Octavio Paz.  And Paz once spoke words that capture the spirit of ourgathering here today -- in this place that celebrates your past, but which this morning is filled with so manyyoung people who will shape Mexico’s future.  Octavio Paz said, “Modernity is not outside us, it is within us. It is today and the most ancient antiquity; it is tomorrow and the beginning of the world; it is a thousandyears old and yet newborn.”
 
 
And that’s why I wanted this opportunity to speak with all of you today, because you live at the intersectionof history that Octavio Paz was referring to.  The young people of Mexico, you honor your heritage,thousands of years old, but you’re also part of something new, a nation that’s in the process of remakingitself.  And as our modern world changes around us, it’s the spirit of young people, your optimism and youridealism, and your willingness to discard old habits that are no longer working that will drive the worldforward. You see the difference between the world as it is and the world as it could to be; between old attitudes thatstifle progress and the new thinking that allows us to connect and collaborate across cultures.  And by theway, that includes how we think about the relationship between Mexico and the United States. Despite all the bonds and the values that we share, despite all the people who claim heritage on both sides,our attitudes sometimes are trapped in old stereotypes.  Some Americans only see the Mexico that isdepicted in sensational headlines of violence and border crossings.  And let’s admit it, some Mexicans thinkthat America disrespects Mexico, or thinks that America is trying to impose itself on Mexican sovereignty, orjust wants to wall ourselves off.  And in both countries such distortions create misunderstandings that makeit harder for us to move forward together.  So I've come to Mexico because I think it’s time for us to put theold mind-sets aside.  It’s time to recognize new realities -- including the impressive progress of today’sMexico.
It is true that there are Mexicans all across this country who are making courageous sacrifices for thesecurity of your country; that in the countryside and the neighborhoods not far from here, there are thosewho are still struggling to give their children a better life.  But what’s also clear is that a new Mexico isemerging.
I see it in the deepening of Mexico’s democracy, citizens who are standing up and saying that violence andimpunity is not acceptable; a courageous press that’s working to hold leaders accountable; a robust civilsociety, including brave defenders of human rights who demand dignity and rule of law.  You have politicalparties that are competing vigorously, but also transferring power peacefully, and forging compromise.  Andthat's all a sign of the extraordinary progress that's taken place here in Mexico.
And even though we know the work of perfecting democracy is never finished -- that's true in America, that'strue here in Mexico -- you go forward knowing the truth that Benito Juarez once spoke -- “democracy is thedestiny of humanity.”  And we are seeing that here in Mexico.  We're seeing that here in Mexico.    We're also seeing a Mexico that’s creating new prosperity:  Trading with the world.  Becoming amanufacturing powerhouse -- from Tijuana to Monterrey to Guadalajara and across the central highlands --a global leader in automobiles and appliances and electronics, but also a center of high-tech innovation,producing the software and the hardware of our digital age.  One man in Querétaro spoke for an increasingnumber of Mexicans.  “There’s no reason to go abroad in search of a better life.  There are goodopportunities here.”  That's what he said, and you are an example of that. And, in fact, I see a Mexico that’s lifted millions of people from poverty.  Because of the sacrifices ofgenerations, a majority of Mexicans now call themselves middle class, with a quality of life that your parentsand grandparents could only dream of.  This includes, by the way, opportunities for women, who are provingthat when you give women a chance, they will shape our destiny just as well as men, if not better.
 
 
I also see in Mexico’s youth an empowered generation because of technology.  I think I see some of youtweeting right now -- what’s happening.  And whether it’s harnessing social media to preserve indigenouslanguages, or speaking up for the future that you want, you’re making it clear that you want your voiceheard.
And because of all the dynamic progress that's taking place here in Mexico, Mexico is also taking its rightfulplace in the world, on the world stage.  Mexico is standing up for democracy not just here in Mexico butthroughout the hemisphere.  Mexico is sharing expertise with neighbors across the Americas.  When theyface earthquakes or threats to their citizens, or go to the polls to cast their votes, Mexico is there, helping itsneighbors.  Mexico has joined the ranks of the world’s largest economies.  It became the first LatinAmerican nation to host the G20. Just as Mexico is being transformed, so are the ties between our two countries.  As President, I’ve beenguided by a basic proposition -- in this relationship there’s no senior partner or junior partner; we are twoequal partners, two sovereign nations. We must work together in mutual interest and mutual respect.  And ifwe do that both Mexico and the United States will prosper.
And just as I worked with President Calderón, I’ve reaffirmed with President Peña Nieto that the greatpartnership between our two countries will not simply continue, it’s going to grow stronger and becomebroader.  In my time with President Peña Nieto, I’ve come to see his deep commitment to Mexico and itsfuture.  And we share the belief that as leaders our guiding mission is to improve the lives of our people. And so we agree that the relationship between our nations must be defined not by the threats that we facebut by the prosperity and the opportunity that we can create together.
Now, as equal partners, both our nations must recognize our mutual responsibilities.  So here in Mexico,you’ve embarked on an ambitious reform agenda to make your economy more competitive and yourinstitutions more accountable to you, the Mexican people.  As you pursue these reforms, I want you to knowthat you have strong support in the United States.  Because we believe, I believe, that people all around theworld deserve the best from their government.  And whether you’re looking for basic services, or trying tostart a new business, we share your belief that you should be able to make it through your day withoutpaying a bribe.  And when talented Mexicans like you imagine your future, you should have everyopportunity to succeed right here in the country you love. And in the United States, we recognize our responsibilities.  We understand that much of the root cause ofviolence that's been happening here in Mexico, for which many so Mexicans have suffered, is the demandfor illegal drugs in the United States.  And so we’ve got to continue to make progress on that front.
I’ve been asked, and I honestly do not believe that legalizing drugs is the answer.  But I do believe that acomprehensive approach -- not just law enforcement, but education and prevention and treatment -- that'swhat we have to do.  And we’re going to stay at it because the lives of our children and the future of ournations depend on it. And we also recognize that most of the guns used to commit violence here in Mexico come from the UnitedStates.  I think many of you know that in America, our Constitution guarantees our individual right to beararms, and as President I swore an oath to uphold that right and I always will.
 
 
But at the same time, as I’ve said in the United States, I will continue to do everything in my power to passcommon-sense reforms that keep guns out of the hands of criminals and dangerous people.  That can savelives here in Mexico and back home in the United States. It’s the right thing to do.  So we’ll keep increasingthe pressure on gun traffickers who bring illegal guns into Mexico.  We’ll keep putting these criminals wherethey belong -- behind bars. 
We recognize we’ve got work to do on security issues, but we also recognize our responsibility -- as a nationthat believes that all people are created equal -- we believe it’s our responsibility to make sure that we treatone another with dignity and respect.  And this includes recognizing how the United States has beenstrengthened by the extraordinary contributions of immigrants from Mexico and by Americans of Mexicanheritage.
Mexican Americans enrich our communities, including my hometown of Chicago, where you can walkthrough neighborhoods like Pilsen, Little Village -- La Villita -- dotted with murals of Mexican patriots.  Youcan stop at a fonda, you can hear some mariachis, where we are inspired by the deep faith of our peoples atchurches like Our Lady of Guadalupe.  We’ve got a Chicagoan in here somewhere.
And we’re so grateful to Mexican Americans in every segment of our society -- for teaching our children, andrunning our companies, and serving with honor in our military, and making breakthroughs in science,standing up for social justice.  As Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. told Cesar Chavez once, we are “brothers in thefight for equality.”  And, in fact, without the strong support of Latinos, including so many Mexican Americans,I would not be standing today as President of the United States.  That's the truth. And so given that is Americas heritage, given that we share a border with Mexico, given ties that run backgenerations, it is critical that the United States recognize the need to reform our immigration system --because we are a nation of laws, but we're also a nation of immigrants.  Like every nation we have aresponsibility to ensure that our laws are upheld.  But we also know that, as a nation of immigrants, theimmigration system we have in the United States right now doesn’t reflect our values.  It separates familieswhen we should be reuniting them. It’s led to millions of people to live in the shadows.  It deprives us of thetalents of so many young people -- even though we know that immigrants have always been the engine ofour economy, starting some of our greatest companies and pioneering new industries. That’s one of the reasons I acted to lift the shadow of deportation from what we call the DREAMers -- youngpeople brought to the United States as children.  And that’s why I’m working with our Congress to passcommon-sense immigration reform this year.  I'm convinced we can get it done.   Reform that continues tostrengthen border security and strengthen legal immigration, so citizens don’t have to wait years to bringtheir families to the United States.  Reform that holds everyone accountable -- so immigrants get on the rightside of the law and so immigrants are not exploited and abused.  And most of all, reform that gives millionsof undocumented individuals a pathway to earn their citizenship.   And I’m optimistic that -- after years oftrying -- we are going to get it done this year.  I'm absolutely convinced of it.
Obviously, we’re going to have to work with the Mexican government to make sure that we've got a well-
regulated border.  But I also want to work with the Mexican government because I believe that the long-termsolution to the challenge of illegal immigration is a growing and prosperous Mexico that creates more jobsand opportunities for young people here. 
 
 
I agree with the Mexican student who said, “I feel like we can reach the same level as anyone in the world.”  
That's absolutely true.  And so I firmly believe -- juntos, podemos lograr más -- together, we can achievemore.  So with the remainder of my time today, I want to focus on five areas where we can do more. Number one, let’s do more to expand trade and commerce that creates good jobs for our people.  Wealready buy more of your exports than any country in the world.  We sell more of our exports to Mexico thanwe do to Brazil, Russia, India and China combined.  Mexican companies are investing more in the UnitedStates, and we’re the largest foreign investor in Mexico -- because we believe in Mexico and want to be apartner in your success. So guided by the new economic dialogue that President Peña Nieto and I announced yesterday, let’s domore to unlock the true potential of our relationship.  Let’s keep investing in our roads and our bridges andour border crossings so we can trade faster and cheaper.  Let’s help our smaller businesses, which employmost of our workers, access new markets and new capital -- the big markets right across the border.  Let’sempower our young entrepreneurs as they create startup companies that can transform how we live.  Andlet’s realize the Trans-Pacific Partnership this year, so our two nations can compete and win in the fast-
growing markets of the Asia Pacific.  If the United States and Mexico are working together, we can sell awhole lot of things on the other side of the Pacific Ocean where the fastest-growing economies are taking offright now.  That's number one. Number two, let’s not just sell more things to each other, let’s build more things together.  With many of ourcompanies operating in both countries, parts are now being shipped back and forth across the border asthey’re assembled.  So every day, U.S. and Mexican workers are building things together -- whether it’scrafts -- or whether it’s cars, or aircraft, or computers, or satellites. I think this is only the beginning.  Given the skills of our workers, it makes even more sense for companiesaround the world to set up shop in the United States and set up shop in Mexico.  And as Mexico reforms,we’re going to be able to do more business together and sell more goods around the world.  And the morethat our companies collaborate, the more competitive they’ll be.  And the entire hemisphere will benefitbecause of those links and chains that have been created between our two countries.
Number three, as we secure our economic future, let’s secure our energy future, including the clean energythat we need to combat climate change.  Our nations are blessed with boundless natural beauty -- from ourcoastlines and farmlands to your tropical forests.  But climate change is happening.  The science isundeniable.  And so is the fact that our economies must become greener. In the United States, we’ve made historic commitments to clean and renewable energy like solar and windpower.  We've made a commitment to reduce the emissions of harmful carbon pollution.  And here inMexico, you’re a leader in cutting carbon emissions and helping developing countries do the same.  So,together, let’s keep building new energy partnerships by harnessing all these new sources, and, by the way,creating the good jobs that come with these new technologies.  And let’s keep investing in green buildingsand technologies that make our entire economy more efficient, but also make our planet cleaner and saferfor future generations.
 
 
Number four -- and this is part of staying competitive -- let’s do more together in education so our youngpeople have the knowledge and skills to succeed.  Here in Mexico you’ve made important progress, withmore children staying in school longer, and record numbers of students like you getting a universityeducation.  Just imagine how much the students of our two countries could do together, how much we couldlearn from each other.
And that’s why President Peña Nieto and I announced a new partnership in higher education -- toencourage more collaboration between our universities and our university students.  We’re going to focus onscience and  technology, on engineering and mathematics.  And this is part of my broader initiative called100,000 Strong in the Americas.  We want 100,000 students from the United States studying in LatinAmerica, including Mexico.  And we want 100,000 Latin American students, including Mexican students, tocome to study in the United States of America.  Because when we study together, and we learn together,we work together, and we prosper together -- that's what I believe.
And finally, to help spark prosperity in both out countries, let’s truly invest in innovation, and research anddevelopment together.  Here in Mexico, you’re now a global leader in graduating engineers andtechnicians.  One of Mexico’s leading scientists, Rafael Navarro-González, is helping analyze data from therover that we landed on Mars. So, together, let’s remember that every dollar, every peso that we invest in research and developmentreturns so much more to our economies in jobs and opportunity, new products, new services.  That's whyI'm calling for us to forge new partnerships in aerospace, and IT, and nanotechnology and biotechnologyand robotics.  Let’s answer the hope of a young woman -- a student at the National Polytechnic Institute --who spoke for many in your generation, so eager to make your mark.  She said, “Give us jobs as creators.” Give us jobs as creators.
Sometimes young people are known as just consumers of goods, but we want young people creating thenew products, the next big thing that will change how we live our lives.  That's the agenda that I want topursue.
And I understand that there are those both here in Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America, but also backhome in the United States, who are skeptical of your progress, who maybe doubt the  capacity for us tomake the most of this moment.  There are always cynics who say, aw, this is too hard, the headwinds youface are too stiff.  They say Mexico has been here before we look like we're making progress, we're lookingat a bright horizon, on the verge of great possibility, but then we get blown off course.
And it’s true that nothing is inevitable.  Progress and success is never guaranteed.  The future that youdream of, the Mexico you imagine -- it must be built, it must be earned.  Nobody else can do it for you.  Onlyyou can earn it.  You are the future.  As Nervo wrote in “La Raza de Bronce,” tu eres el sueño -- you are thedream.
For just as it was patriots who answered the call when Father Hidalgo rang the church bell two centuriesago, you -- your lives, in a free Mexico -- are the dream that they imagined.  And now it falls to you to keepalive those virtues for which so many generations of Mexicans struggled. 
 
 
You are the dream that can stand up for justice and human rights and human dignity, here at home andaround the world.  You’re the creators and the builders and the climbers and the strivers who can deliverprogress and prosperity that will lift up not just the Mexican people for generations to come, but the entireworld. You’re the men and women who will push this nation upwards as Mexico assumes its rightful place, as youproudly sing: “in heaven your eternal destiny was written by the finger of God.” You are the dream.  This is your moment.  And as you reach for the future, always remember that you havethe greatest of  partners, the greatest if friends -- the nation that is rooting for your success more thananybody else -- your neighbor, the United States of America.
Viva México!   Viva los Estados Unidos!   Que Dios los bendiga!  Thank you very much.
