Happy New Year, everybody. I am fired up for the year that stretches out before us. That’sbecause of what we’ve accomplished together over the past seven.
Seven years ago, our businesses were losing 800,000 jobs a month. They’ve now created jobsfor 69 straight months, driving the unemployment rate from a high of 10% down to 5%.
Seven years ago, too many Americans went without health insurance. We’ve now coveredmore than 17 million people, dropping the rate of the uninsured below 10% for the very firsttime.
Seven years ago, we were addicted to foreign oil. Now our oil imports have plummeted, ourclean energy industry is booming, and America is a global leader in the fight against climatechange.
Seven years ago, there were only two states in America with marriage equality. And nowthere are 50.
All of this progress is because of you. And we’ve got so much more to do. So my New Year’sresolution is to move forward on our unfinished business as much as I can. And I’ll be morefrequently asking for your help. That’s what this American project is all about.
  
That's especially true for one piece of unfinished business, that’s our epidemic of gun violence.
Last month, we remembered the third anniversary of Newtown. This Friday, I’ll be thinkingabout my friend Gabby Giffords, five years into her recovery from the shooting in Tucson. Andall across America, survivors of gun violence and those who lost a child, a parent, a spouse togun violence are forced to mark such awful anniversaries every single day.
And yet Congress still hasn’t done anything to prevent what happened to them fromhappening to other families. Three years ago, a bipartisan, commonsense bill would haverequired background checks for virtually everyone who buys a gun. Keep in mind, this policywas supported by some 90% of the American people. It was supported by a majority of NRAhouseholds. But the gun lobby mobilized against it. And the Senate blocked it.
Since then, tens of thousands of our fellow Americans have been mowed down by gunviolence. Tens of thousands. Each time, we’re told that commonsense reforms like backgroundchecks might not have stopped the last massacre, or the one before that, so we shouldn’t doanything.
We know that we can’t stop every act of violence. But what if we tried to stop even one? Whatif Congress did something -- anything -- to protect our kids from gun violence?
A few months ago, I directed my team at the White House to look into any new actions I cantake to help reduce gun violence. And on Monday, I’ll meet with our Attorney General, LorettaLynch, to discuss our options. Because I get too many letters from parents, and teachers, andkids, to sit around and do nothing. I get letters from responsible gun owners who grieve withus every time these tragedies happen; who share my belief that the Second Amendmentguarantees a right to bear arms; and who share my belief we can protect that right whilekeeping an irresponsible, dangerous few from inflicting harm on a massive scale.
So I know there are a bunch of us who care about this. If you are one of them, I need yourhelp.
Change, as always, is going to take all of us.
The gun lobby is loud and well organized in its defense of effortlessly available guns foranyone. The rest of us are going to have to be just as passionate and well organized in ourdefense of our kids. That’s the work of citizenship -- to stand up and fight for the change thatwe seek.
I hope you’ll join me in making America safer for all of our children.
Thanks, everybody.
