In short, if we do not act boldly and swiftly, a bad situation could become dramatically worse.
That is why I have proposed an American Recovery and Reinvestment Plan to immediatelyjumpstart job creation as well as long-term economic growth. I am pleased to say that bothparties in Congress are already hard at work on this plan, and I hope to sign it into law in lessthan a month.
It’s a plan that will save or create three to four million jobs over the next few years, and onethat recognizes both the paradox and the promise of this moment -- the fact that there aremillions of Americans trying to find work even as, all around the country, there’s so muchwork to be done. That’s why this is not just a short-term program to boost employment. It’sone that will invest in our most important priorities like energy and education; health care anda new infrastructure that are necessary to keep us strong and competitive in the 21st century.
Today I’d like to talk specifically about the progress we expect to make in each of these areas.

To accelerate the creation of a clean energy economy, we will double our capacity to generatealternative sources of energy like wind, solar, and biofuels over the next three years. We’llbegin to build a new electricity grid that lay down more than 3,000 miles of transmission linesto convey this new energy from coast to coast. We’ll save taxpayers $2 billion a year bymaking 75% of federal buildings more energy efficient, and save the average working family$350 on their energy bills by weatherizing 2.5 million homes.
To lower health care cost, cut medical errors, and improve care, we’ll computerize the nation’shealth record in five years, saving billions of dollars in health care costs and countless lives.And we’ll protect health insurance for more than 8 million Americans who are in danger oflosing their coverage during this economic downturn.
To ensure our children can compete and succeed in this new economy, we’ll renovate andmodernize 10,000 schools, building state-of-the-art classrooms, libraries, and labs to improvelearning for over five million students. We’ll invest more in Pell Grants to make collegeaffordable for seven million more students, provide a $2,500 college tax credit to four millionstudents, and triple the number of fellowships in science to help spur the next generation ofinnovation.
Finally, we will rebuild and retrofit America to meet the demands of the 21st century. Thatmeans repairing and modernizing thousands of miles of America’s roadways and providingnew mass transit options for millions of Americans. It means protecting America by securing90 major ports and creating a better communications network for local law enforcement andpublic safety officials in the event of an emergency. And it means expanding broadbandaccess to millions of Americans, so business can compete on a level-playing field, whereverthey’re located.
I know that some are skeptical about the size and scale of this recovery plan. I understandthat skepticism, which is why this recovery plan must and will include unprecedentedmeasures that will allow the American people to hold my Administration accountable for theseresults. We won’t just throw money at our problems -- we’ll invest in what works. Instead ofpoliticians doling out money behind a veil of secrecy, decisions about where we invest will bemade public, and informed by independent experts whenever possible. We’ll launch anunprecedented effort to root out waste, inefficiency, and unnecessary spending in ourgovernment, and every American will be able to see how and where we spend taxpayerdollars by going to a new website called recovery.gov.
No one policy or program will solve the challenges we face right now, nor will this crisis recedein a short period of time. But if we act now and act boldly; if we start rewarding hard workand responsibility once more; if we act as citizens and not partisans and begin again the workof remaking America, then I have faith that we will emerge from this trying time evenstronger and more prosperous than we were before.
Thanks for listening.