Hello, everybody!  Hey!  Thank you!  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  Thank you,everybody.  Thank you.  Everybody, please have a seat.  Please have a seat.  Well, it is goodto be back in Tennessee.  I hope you guys aren’t getting tired of me.  I’ve been comingaround a lot lately, because there’s a lot of good stuff happening here. 
I want to begin by thanking Joe and Jill Biden.  They’re not just good friends and goodpartners, but they really believe in the power of education and they really believe in creatingthose kinds of ladders of opportunity that gave all three of us and Michelle the chances, theincredible opportunities that we’ve had today.  And they understand the promise of America’scommunity colleges.  Well, Jill really understands it, and Joe -- he doesn’t really have achoice.
Before I get into the reason that I’m here today, I want to begin by saying just a few wordsabout the tragic events that we’ve watched unfold in France over the last several hours anddays.  And because events have been fast-moving this morning, I wanted to make sure tocomment on them.
I just spoke to my counterterrorism advisor.  We have been in close touch with the Frenchgovernment throughout this tragedy.  The moment that the outrageous attack took place, wedirected all of our law enforcement and counterintelligence operations to provide whateversupport that our ally needs in confronting this challenge.  We’re hopeful that the immediatethreat is now resolved, thanks to the courage and professionalism of the French personnel onthe ground. 
  
But the French government continues to face the threat of terrorism and has to remainvigilant.  The situation is fluid.  President Hollande has made it clear that they’re going to dowhatever is necessary to protect their people.  And I think it’s important for us tounderstand:  France is our oldest ally.  I want the people of France to know that the UnitedStates stands with you today, stands with you tomorrow.  Our thoughts and prayers are withthe families who have been directly impacted.  We grieve with you.  We fight alongside you touphold our values, the values that we share -- universal values that bind us together asfriends and as allies. 
And in the streets of Paris, the world has seen once again what terrorists stand for.  Theyhave nothing to offer but hatred and human suffering.  And we stand for freedom and hopeand the dignity of all human beings.  And that’s what the city of Paris represents to the world,and that spirit will endure forever -- long after the scourge of terrorism is banished from thisworld.
Now, I’m in Knoxville not only because I just like Knoxville, but I’m here today because one ofmy resolutions is to make sure that folks across this great country feel like they are comingback.  And there is no doubt:  Thanks to the steps we took early on to rescue our economyand to rebuild it on a new foundation, America is coming back. 
Now, I’m not running for office anymore, so let me just present the facts.  I promised that2014 would be a breakthrough year for America.  This morning, we got more evidence to backthat up.  In December, our businesses created 240,000 new jobs.  Our unemployment rate fellto 5.6 percent, which is the lowest in six and a half years.  What that means is, 2014 was thestrongest year for job growth since the 1990s.  Unemployment fell in 2014 faster than anyyear since 1984.  Now, think about that.  It’s been 30 years since unemployment fell as fastas it did last year.  And most importantly, we’re seeing faster job growth in industries thatprovide good-paying jobs, traditionally middle-class jobs, than anything else. 
Since 2010, the United States of America has create more jobs than Europe, Japan, and everyother advanced economy combined. American manufacturing is in its best stretch of jobgrowth since the 1990s.  We’re actually seeing companies insourcing instead of outsourcing. They’re realizing, we want to be here with American workers making American products. America is now the world’s number-one producer in oil, gas.  We’ve doubled the production ofclean energy.  And, by the way, you’re saving about a buck-ten a gallon at the pump over thistime last year.
Although I keep on reminding folks, gas prices, they go up and they come down and then theygo up.  So I just want everybody to know that you should enjoy this.  Take the money you’resaving, pay off the credit card or go get a new appliance, or buy a fuel-efficient car -- so thatwhen prices go back up, you’re still well-positioned.
  
Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, about 10 million Americans have gained health insuranceover the past year.  And, by the way, we’ve done this while cutting our deficits by about two-
thirds.  Everybody thinks that -- they did a survey -- in every survey, they ask, is the deficitgoing up or going down?  And 70 percent of Americans say that the deficit is going up.  Thedeficit has come down by two-thirds since I took office.
Meanwhile, thanks to the hard work of students and educators, dropout rates are down,graduation rates are up.  And after 13 long years, our war in Afghanistan has come to aresponsible end, and we’ve got more troops that were home this holiday season.
So I say all this because these six years have demanded a lot of hard work and a lot ofsacrifice on everybody’s part.  And as a country, we’ve got every right to be proud of whatwe’ve got to show for it.  America’s resurgence is real.  And now that we’ve seen calmerwaters economically, if we all do our part, if we all pitch in, then we can start making surethat all boats are actually lifted again, and wages and incomes start rising again.  And we canmake sure that the middle class is the engine that powers America’s prosperity just as italways has.
So that’s going to be the focus of my State of the Union address in a couple weeks.  I wantedto give you a little preview.  Don’t tell anybody I said this.  I’m giving you the inside scoop. That’s going to be the essence of my message:  How do we build on the progress that we’vemade?  And I figured, why wait for the State of the Union?  Why stand on formalities; let’s getthe ball rolling right now.
Two days ago, I visited Michigan, where workers have brought the auto industry roaringback.  And we talked about what else we can do around advanced manufacturing.  Yesterday,I was in Arizona, where I announced new actions to make the dream of homeownership areality for more middle-class families.  Later today, Joe and I are going to head to a companyin Clinton to take action that will develop high-tech industry even further here in Tennessee. And right here, right now, at Pellissippi State, I’m going to announce one of my mostimportant State of the Union proposals, and that’s helping every American afford a highereducation.
Now, part of the reason I wanted to come here was because Tennessee is at the forefront ofdoing some really smart stuff.  And we’ve got some proud Tennesseans who can take somecredit for the great work that’s been done.  First, your Governor, Bill Haslam, who’s here. Your two very fine senators, -- you’ve got Bob Corker -- and your senior Senator, LamarAlexander, who’s a former Secretary of Education himself, so he knows a little bit about this. You’ve got Congressman John Duncan.  Your Mayor, Madeline Rogero.  And we've gotPellissippi’s president, Anthony Wise. Hey!  And we've got all of you.
  
Now, Joe and Jill both already touched on these themes, but let me just amplify them a littlebit.  Here in America we don't guarantee equal outcomes.  Some folks work harder; somefolks don't.  Some folks take advantage of opportunities; some folks don't.  Some people havegood luck; some people have bad luck and things don't always work out where everything isperfectly equal.  But we do expect that everybody gets an equal shot.  We do expecteverybody can go as far as their dreams and hard work will take them. 
We don't expect anybody to be bound by the circumstances of their birth.  If they were, Iwouldn't be here, and neither would Joe.  Jill -- she’s so accomplished she would havesucceeded no matter what.  But we expect everybody to get a fair shot.  And in exchange, wedo our fair share.  That's the basic bargain at the heart of this country:  If you work hard, youcan get ahead.  It shouldn’t matter what your last name is, or what we look like, or whatfamily we were born into, or how we worship.  What matters is effort and merit.  That's thepromise of America. 
And the way we deliver on that is making sure that our education system works on behalf ofevery person who lives here.  America thrived in the 20th century in large part because wemade high school the norm, and then we sent a generation to college on the GI Bill --including my grandfather.  Then we dedicated ourselves to cultivating the most educatedworkforce in the world and we invested in what’s one of the crown jewels of this country, andthat's our higher education system.  And dating back to Abraham Lincoln, we invested in land-
grant colleges.  We understood that this was a hallmark of America, this investment ineducation.
But eventually, the world caught on and the world caught up.  And that’s why we have to leadthe world in education again.  That’s why my administration is working to make high-qualityearly childhood education available to all of our kids.  We know if we invest in them early, thatit pays dividends on the backend.
That's why we're working to bring high-speed broadband to 99 percent of America’s studentswithin the next four years.  We want to make sure every child is plugged in.  That's why we'rerecruiting more highly trained math and science teachers.  That's why we’re working to raisestandards and invest more in our elementary and middle and high schools, so that everyyoung person is prepared for a competitive world. 
And this work is not easy.  Sometimes it's controversial. It's not going to be the same in everystate.  But in places like Tennessee, we're seeing incredible strides as a consequence of theseefforts.  Over the past few years, Tennessee students have improved their reading scores andmath scores more than any other state in the country.  That’s a credit to their hard work, theirteachers’ hard work, to Governor Haslam’s hard work, leaders from both parties.  It's been abipartisan effort.  Every Tennessean should be proud of that. 
  
And today, in a 21st century economy, where your most valuable asset is your knowledge, thesingle most important way to get ahead is not just to get a high school education, you’ve gotto get some higher education.  That’s why all of you are here.
Now, the value of an education is not purely instrumental.  Education helps us be betterpeople.  It helps us be better citizens.  You came to college to learn about the world and toengage with new ideas and to discover the things you’re passionate about -- and maybe havea little fun.  And to expand your horizons.  That’s terrific -- that’s a huge part of what collegehas to offer. 
But you’re also here, now more than ever, because a college degree is the surest ticket to themiddle class.  It is the key to getting a good job that pays a good income -- and to provideyou the security where even if you don't have the same job for 30 years, you're so adaptableand you have a skill set and the capacity to learn new skills, it ensures you're alwaysemployable.
And that is the key not just for individual Americans, that’s the key for this whole country’sability to compete in the global economy.  In the new economy, jobs and businesses will gowherever the most skilled, best-educated workforce resides.  Because businesses are mobilenow.  Technology means they can locate anywhere.  And where they have the most educated,most adaptable, most nimble workforce, that's where they’re going to locate.  And I wantthem to look no further than the United States of America.  I want them coming right here.  Iwant those businesses here, and I want the American people to be able to get thosebusinesses -- or get those jobs that those businesses create. 
So that’s why we’ve increased grants and took on a student loan system that was funnelingbillions of taxpayer dollars through big banks, and said let’s cut out the middleman, let’s givethem directly to students instead, we can help more students. 
We’ve increased scholarships.  We've cut taxes for people paying tuition.  We've let studentscap their federal student loan payments at 10 percent of income so that they can borrow withconfidence, particularly if you're going into a job like nursing or teaching that may not pay ahuge salary but that's where your passions are. 
We’re creating a new college ratings system that will give parents and students the kind ofclear, concise information you need to shop around for a school with the best value for you --and gives us the capacity to recognize schools that offer a great education at a reasonableprice. 
On the flight over here, Lamar and I were talking about how we can do more to simplify theapplication process for federal student loans, which is still too complicated. 
  
So we've done a lot of good work over the last six years; we're going to keep at it.  But today,I want to focus on a centerpiece of my education agenda -- and that’s the communitycolleges, like this one. 
For millions of Americans, community colleges are essential pathways to the middle classbecause they’re local, they’re flexible.  They work for people who work full-time.  They workfor parents who have to raise kids full-time.  They work for folks who have gone as far as theirskills will take them and want to earn new ones, but don’t have the capacity to just suddenlygo study for four years and not work.  Community colleges work for veterans transitioningback into civilian life.  Whether you’re the first in your family to go to college, or coming backto school after many years away, community colleges find a place for you.  And you can get agreat education. 
Now, Jill has been teaching English at community colleges for 20 years.  She started when shewas like 15.  And she’s still full-time today.  And she sees -- I talk to her and she talks abouther students, and she can see the excitement and the promise, and sometimes the fear ofbeing a 32-year-old mom who’s going back to school and never finished the degree that shehad started, and life got in the way and now she’s coming back and suddenly getting a wholenew skills set and seeing a whole range of career options opening up to her.  It’s exciting. 
And that’s what community colleges are all about -- the idea that no one with drive anddiscipline should be left out, should be locked out of opportunity, and certainly that nobodywith that drive and discipline should be denied a college education just because they don’thave the money.  Every American, whether they’re young or just young at heart, should beable to earn the skills and education necessary to compete and win in the 21st centuryeconomy.
So today I’m announcing an ambitious new plan to bring down the cost of community collegetuition in America.  I want to bring it down to zero.  We’re going to -- I want to make it free. I want to make it free.  Community colleges should be free for those willing to work for it --because in America, a quality education cannot be a privilege that is reserved for a few.  Ithink it’s a right for everybody who’s willing to work for it.
Now, the good news is, you already do something like this in Tennessee.  You call itTennessee Promise.  So you call it Tennessee Promise, and we thought why not just build onwhat works.  So we’re going to call it “America’s College Promise.”
And the concept is simple:  America’s College Promise will make two years of communitycollege free to responsible students who are willing to work for it.  Now, I want to underscorethat last clause -- everybody who’s working hard for it.  There are no free rides in America. You would have to earn it.  Students would have to do their part by keeping their grades up. Colleges would have to do their part by offering high-quality academics and helping studentsactually graduate.
  
States would have to do their part too.  This isn’t a blank check.  It’s not a free lunch.  But forthose willing to do the work, and for states and local communities that want to be a part ofthis, it can be a game-changer.
Think about it:  Students who started at community colleges during those two years, and thengo on to a four-year institution, they essentially get the first half of their bachelor’s degree forfree.  People who enroll for skills training will graduate already ready to work, and they won’thave a pile of student debt.  Two years of college will become as free and universal as highschool is today. 
Now, we’re also taking another page out of Tennessee’s playbook and making investments toexpand technical training programs at community colleges, much like you do through your 27Colleges of Applied Technology.   Joe did a terrific job running a task force that we puttogether just to look at the job training and technical training systems all around the country. And at a time when jobs are changing, and higher wages call for higher skills, we’ve got tomake sure workers have a chance to get those skills. 
We want young people to graduate with real-world training that leads directly to good jobs,and we want older workers to get retrained so they can compete.  And we want more womenand minorities to get jobs in fields that traditionally they’ve been left out of, like science andtechnology, and engineering and math.  And we want to connect community colleges withemployers, because when that’s done right, these partnerships pay off for everybody: Students learn on the job, employers get access to talent, colleges get help designing coursesthat actually prepare people for the workplace, all of which creates better pathways to today’smiddle class.  So we’re going to find the programs that work and we’re going to help themgrow. 
Now, in a few weeks, I’m going to send to Congress my plan for free community college.  Ihope that Congress will come together to support it, because opening the doors of highereducation shouldn’t be a Democratic issue or a Republican issue.  This is an American issue.   
Governor Haslam is a Republican.  And thanks to his leadership, last year Democrats andRepublicans came together and made Tennessee the first state in decades to offer freecommunity college to its students.  Meanwhile, up in my hometown of Chicago, Mayor RahmEmanuel, who is a Democrat, is now offering free community college, and they’re pairingstudents with growing sectors of the economy so they graduate with good jobs.  So if a statewith Republican leadership is doing this and a city with Democratic leadership is doing this,then how about we all do it?  Let’s do it for our future.
And as I said before, there are a bunch of good bipartisan ideas out there.  A few days ago,Senator Alexander joined forces with a Democratic Senator, Michael Bennet, to introduce thelegislation that would make financial aid forms simpler.  I noticed a lot of people applauded,because it’s been a while since I filled it out -- but I understand there’s more than 100questions on it.
  
It just shouldn’t be that hard to apply for aid for college.  And so I’ve committed to workingwith Senator Alexander.  Let’s shrink it down.  Let’s make life a little easier for millions offamilies.  The point is, we’re not going to agree on everything.  But simplifying that form,that’s something we should be able to agree on.  Let’s get that done this year.
Because in the end, nothing is more important to our country than you, our people.  That’sour asset.  We’ve got very nice real estate here.  We’ve got this incredible bounty, the God-
given resources that we enjoy in this country.  But our greatest resources are people. 
And I want to say to the students here and the staff and faculty how proud I am of what youguys are doing.  A lot of students here, I know you had to overcome some obstacles to gethere.  Many of you are the first in your families to go to college.  Some of you are working fulltime while you’re going to school.  But you’re making this investment in you, and by doingthat, you’re making an investment in this country’s future.
And I just want to use one person’s story as an example, Caitlin McLawhorn.  Where’s Caitlin? Where is she?  Is she here?  I thought she was here a second ago, but I’m going to tell herstory anyway. 
She was raised by a single mom.  She helped make ends meet, getting her first job almostthe minute she could, two days after her 16th birthday.  When it came time for college, themoney wasn’t there.  But Caitlin lives in Tennessee, so she knew she had a great, free option. She completed two years at this institution.  Now she’s a senior at Maryville College.  She’sworking full-time, just like she has since her first day of college.  And Caitlin says, “A lot ofpeople like me got discouraged.  I get discouraged.  But I can look back and say, you’ve madeit so far.  I’ve learned that things aren’t always what you want, but you can make them whatyou want.”  That’s wisdom.
“Things aren’t always what you want, but you can make them what you want.”  That’s whatAmerica is about.  We can make of our lives what we will.  And there are going to be bumps,and there are going to be challenges.  And we’ve come through some very hard times.  Thingsaren’t always what we wanted, but we have overcome discouragement and we have overcomedivision and, sometimes, some discord.  And we don’t give up.  We get up, we fight back, wecome back stronger than before. 
Thanks to the hard work of the American people, the United States of America is comingback.  And I’ve never been as confident as -- in my entire life that we’re going to make of ourfuture what we want of it thanks to you. 
Appreciate it, Tennessee.  God bless you.  God bless America.
