Thank you, everybody, for being here.
As we all know, our country has endured the deepest recession we've faced ingenerations. And much of the turmoil was caused by irresponsibility on the part of banks andfinancial institutions. Firms took reckless risks in pursuit of short-term profits and soaringbonuses, triggering a financial crisis that nearly pulled the economy into a second GreatDepression.
It was little more than a year ago that we stood on that precipice. Several of the world'slargest financial institutions had already failed. Credit markets froze and banks refused tolend. Trillions of dollars in household savings evaporated as stocks, pensions, and homevalues plummeted. And we were losing hundreds of thousands of jobs each month. It was atthis time that many large financial firms -- those left standing -- teetered on the brink ofcollapse, overwhelmed by the consequences of their irresponsible decisions.

Now, even though these firms were largely facing a crisis of their own making, their failurecould have led to an even greater calamity for the country. So the Federal Reserve and otheragencies took emergency measures to prevent that outcome. And the previous Administrationstarted a program -- the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP -- to provide these financialinstitutions with funds to survive the turmoil that they had helped unleash. It was a distastefulbut necessary thing to do.
Now, we've worked over the last year to manage this program effectively, to hold firmsaccountable, and to recoup as much tax money as possible. Many originally feared that mostof the 700 billion dollars in TARP money would be lost. But because of the management of thisprogram by Secretary Geithner and my economic team, we've now recovered the majority ofthe funds provided to banks.
As far as I'm concerned, however, that's not good enough. My commitment is to thetaxpayer.  My commitment is to recover every single dime the American people are owed. Andmy determination to achieve this goal is only heightened when I see reports of massive profitsand obscene bonuses at some of the very firms who owe their continued existence to theAmerican people -- folks who have not been made whole, and who continue to face realhardship in this recession.
We want our money back. And we're going to get it.
And that's why I'm proposing a "Financial Crisis Responsibility Fee" to be imposed on majorfinancial firms until the American people are fully compensated for the extraordinaryassistance they provided to Wall Street. If these companies are in good enough shape toafford massive bonuses, they are surely in good enough shape to afford paying back everypenny to taxpayers.
Now, our estimate is that the TARP program will end up costing taxpayers around 117 billiondollars -- obviously a lot less than the 700 billion that people had feared, but still a lot ofmoney. The fee will be in place for 10 years, or as long as it takes to raise the full amountnecessary to cover all taxpayer losses. This will not be a cost borne by community banks orsmall financial firms. Only the largest firms with more than 50 billion dollars in assets will beaffected. And the size of the fee each bank owes will be based on its size and exposure todebt, so that we are recovering tax dollars while promoting reform of the banking practicesthat contributed to this crisis.
Now, the fact is these financial institutions are essential to our economy. They provide capitaland credit to families purchasing homes, students attending college, businesses seeking tostart up or expand. And that's why the rescue program was as necessary as it wasunfortunate.  And that is why, through this fee and broader reforms that we seek, our goal isnot to punish Wall Street firms, but rather to prevent the abuse and excess that nearly causedthe collapse of many of these firms and the financial system itself.

We cannot go back to "business as usual." And when we see reports of firms once againengaging in risky bets to reap quick rewards, when we see a return to compensation practicesthat seem not to reflect what the country has been through, all that looks like business asusual to me. The financial industry has even launched a massive lobbying campaign, lockingarms with the opposition Party, to stand in the way of reforms to prevent another crisis. That,too, unfortunately, is business as usual. And we're already hearing a hue and cry from WallStreet suggesting that this proposed fee is not only unwelcome but unfair -- that by sometwisted logic it is more appropriate for the American people to bear the costs of the bailout,rather than the industry that benefited from it, even though these executives are out theregiving themselves huge bonuses.
What I'd say to these executives is this: Instead of sending a phalanx of lobbyists to fight thisproposal, or employing an army of lawyers and accountants to help evade the fee, I suggestyou might want to consider simply meeting your responsibilities. And I'd urge you to cover thecosts of the rescue not by sticking it to your shareholders or your customers or fellow citizenswith the bill, but by rolling back bonuses for top earners and executives. And more broadly, Iam continuing to call on these firms to put greater effort into helping families stay in theirhomes, to provide small businesses with needed loans, and to embrace -- rather than fight --serious financial reform.
Ultimately, it is by taking responsibility -- on Wall Street, here in Washington, all the way toMain Street -- that we're going to move past this period of turmoil. That's how we're going toavoid the cycles of boom and bust that have caused so much havoc. That's how we're going topromote vibrant markets that reward innovation and entrepreneurship and hard work. That'show we're going to create sustained growth without the looming threat of another costlycrisis. That's not only in the best interests of the economy as a whole; it's actually in theinterest of these large banks.
So, I'm going to be working closely with Congress on this proposal.
And on behalf of the American people, I look forward to signing it into law.
Thank you very much.