Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, fellow delegates, ladies and gentlemen:  We cometogether at a crossroads between war and peace; between disorder and integration; betweenfear and hope.
Around the globe, there are signposts of progress.  The shadow of World War that existed atthe founding of this institution has been lifted, and the prospect of war between major powersreduced.  The ranks of member states has more than tripled, and more people live undergovernments they elected. Hundreds of millions of human beings have been freed from theprison of poverty, with the proportion of those living in extreme poverty cut in half.  And theworld economy continues to strengthen after the worst financial crisis of our lives. 
Today, whether you live in downtown Manhattan or in my grandmother’s village more than200 miles from Nairobi, you can hold in your hand more information than the world’s greatestlibraries.  Together, we’ve learned how to cure disease and harness the power of the wind andthe sun.  The very existence of this institution is a unique achievement -- the people of theworld committing to resolve their differences peacefully, and to solve their problemstogether.  I often tell young people in the United States that despite the headlines, this is thebest time in human history to be born, for you are more likely than ever before to be literate,to be healthy, to be free to pursue your dreams.
And yet there is a pervasive unease in our world -- a sense that the very forces that havebrought us together have created new dangers and made it difficult for any single nation toinsulate itself from global forces.
  
As we gather here, an outbreak of Ebola overwhelms public health systems in West Africa andthreatens to move rapidly across borders.  Russian aggression in Europe recalls the days whenlarge nations trampled small ones in pursuit of territorial ambition.  The brutality of terroristsin Syria and Iraq forces us to look into the heart of darkness.
Each of these problems demands urgent attention.  But they are also symptoms of a broaderproblem -- the failure of our international system to keep pace with an interconnected world.We, collectively, have not invested adequately in the public health capacity of developingcountries.  Too often, we have failed to enforce international norms when it’s inconvenient todo so.  And we have not confronted forcefully enough the intolerance, sectarianism, andhopelessness that feeds violent extremism in too many parts of the globe.
Fellow delegates, we come together as united nations with a choice to make.  We can renewthe international system that has enabled so much progress, or we can allow ourselves to bepulled back by an undertow of instability.  We can reaffirm our collective responsibility toconfront global problems, or be swamped by more and more outbreaks of instability.  And forAmerica, the choice is clear:  We choose hope over fear.  We see the future not as somethingout of our control, but as something we can shape for the better through concerted andcollective effort.  We reject fatalism or cynicism when it comes to human affairs.  We chooseto work for the world as it should be, as our children deserve it to be.
There is much that must be done to meet the test of this moment.  But today I’d like to focuson two defining questions at the root of so many of our challenges -- whether the nations heretoday will be able to renew the purpose of the UN’s founding; and whether we will cometogether to reject the cancer of violent extremism.  
First, all of us -- big nations and small -- must meet our responsibility to observe and enforceinternational norms.  We are here because others realized that we gain more from cooperationthan conquest.  One hundred years ago, a World War claimed the lives of many millions,proving that with the terrible power of modern weaponry, the cause of empire ultimately leadsto the graveyard.  It would take another World War to roll back the forces of fascism, thenotions of racial supremacy, and form this United Nations to ensure that no nation cansubjugate its neighbors and claim their territory. 
Recently, Russia’s actions in Ukraine challenge this post-war order.  Here are the facts.  Afterthe people of Ukraine mobilized popular protests and calls for reform, their corrupt presidentfled.  Against the will of the government in Kyiv, Crimea was annexed.  Russia poured armsinto eastern Ukraine, fueling violent separatists and a conflict that has killed thousands.  Whena civilian airliner was shot down from areas that these proxies controlled, they refused toallow access to the crash for days.  When Ukraine started to reassert control over its territory,Russia gave up the pretense of merely supporting the separatists, and moved troops acrossthe border.
  
This is a vision of the world in which might makes right -- a world in which one nation’sborders can be redrawn by another, and civilized people are not allowed to recover theremains of their loved ones because of the truth that might be revealed. America stands forsomething different.  We believe that right makes might -- that bigger nations should not beable to bully smaller ones, and that people should be able to choose their own future.
And these are simple truths, but they must be defended. America and our allies will supportthe people of Ukraine as they develop their democracy and economy.  We will reinforce ourNATO Allies and uphold our commitment to collective self-defense.  We will impose a cost onRussia for aggression, and we will counter falsehoods with the truth.  And we call upon othersto join us on the right side of history -- for while small gains can be won at the barrel of agun, they will ultimately be turned back if enough voices support the freedom of nations andpeoples to make their own decisions.
Moreover, a different path is available -- the path of diplomacy and peace, and the ideals thisinstitution is designed to uphold.  The recent cease-fire agreement in Ukraine offers anopening to achieve those objectives.  If Russia takes that path -- a path that for stretches ofthe post-Cold War period resulted in prosperity for the Russian people -- then we will lift oursanctions and welcome Russia’s role in addressing common challenges.  After all, that’s whatthe United States and Russia have been able to do in past years -- from reducing our nuclearstockpiles to meeting our obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, tocooperating to remove and destroy Syria’s declared chemical weapons.  And that’s the kind ofcooperation we are prepared to pursue again -- if Russia changes course. 
This speaks to a central question of our global age -- whether we will solve our problemstogether, in a spirit of mutual interest and mutual respect, or whether we descend into thedestructive rivalries of the past.  When nations find common ground, not simply based onpower, but on principle, then we can make enormous progress.  And I stand before you todaycommitted to investing American strength to working with all nations to address the problemswe face in the 21st century.
As we speak, America is deploying our doctors and scientists -- supported by our military -- tohelp contain the outbreak of Ebola and pursue new treatments.  But we need a broader effortto stop a disease that could kill hundreds of thousands, inflict horrific suffering, destabilizeeconomies, and move rapidly across borders.  It’s easy to see this as a distant problem --until it is not.  And that is why we will continue to mobilize other countries to join us in makingconcrete commitments, significant commitments to fight this outbreak, and enhance oursystem of global health security for the long term.
America is pursuing a diplomatic resolution to the Iranian nuclear issue, as part of ourcommitment to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and pursue the peace and security of aworld without them.
  
And this can only take place if Iran seizes this historic opportunity.  My message to Iran’sleaders and people has been simple and consistent:  Do not let this opportunity pass.  We canreach a solution that meets your energy needs while assuring the world that your program ispeaceful.
America is and will continue to be a Pacific power, promoting peace, stability, and the freeflow of commerce among nations.  But we will insist that all nations abide by the rules of theroad, and resolve their territorial disputes peacefully, consistent with international law.  That’show the Asia-Pacific has grown.  And that’s the only way to protect this progress goingforward.
America is committed to a development agenda that eradicates extreme poverty by 2030.  Wewill do our part to help people feed themselves, power their economies, and care for theirsick.  If the world acts together, we can make sure that all of our children enjoy lives ofopportunity and dignity. 
America is pursuing ambitious reductions in our carbon emissions, and we’ve increased ourinvestments in clean energy. We will do our part, and help developing nations do theirs.  Butthe science tells us we can only succeed in combating climate change if we are joined in thiseffort by every other nation, by every major power.  That’s how we can protect this planet forour children and our grandchildren.
In other words, on issue after issue, we cannot rely on a rule book written for a differentcentury.  If we lift our eyes beyond our borders -- if we think globally and if we actcooperatively -- we can shape the course of this century, as our predecessors shaped thepost-World War II age.  But as we look to the future, one issue risks a cycle of conflict thatcould derail so much progress, and that is the cancer of violent extremism that has ravagedso many parts of the Muslim world.
Of course, terrorism is not new.  Speaking before this Assembly, President Kennedy put itwell:  “Terror is not a new weapon,” he said.  “Throughout history it has been used by thosewho could not prevail, either by persuasion or example.”  In the 20th century, terror was usedby all manner of groups who failed to come to power through public support.  But in thiscentury, we have faced a more lethal and ideological brand of terrorists who have pervertedone of the world’s great religions.  With access to technology that allows small groups to dogreat harm, they have embraced a nightmarish vision that would divide the world intoadherents and infidels -- killing as many innocent civilians as possible, employing the mostbrutal methods to intimidate people within their communities.
I have made it clear that America will not base our entire foreign policy on reacting toterrorism.  Instead, we’ve waged a focused campaign against al Qaeda and its associatedforces -- taking out their leaders, denying them the safe havens they rely on.
  
At the same time, we have reaffirmed again and again that the United States is not and neverwill be at war with Islam.  Islam teaches peace.  Muslims the world over aspire to live withdignity and a sense of justice.  And when it comes to America and Islam, there is no us andthem, there is only us -- because millions of Muslim Americans are part of the fabric of ourcountry.
So we reject any suggestion of a clash of civilizations. Belief in permanent religious war is themisguided refuge of extremists who cannot build or create anything, and therefore peddleonly fanaticism and hate.  And it is no exaggeration to say that humanity’s future depends onus uniting against those who would divide us along the fault lines of tribe or sect, race orreligion.
But this is not simply a matter of words.  Collectively, we must take concrete steps to addressthe danger posed by religiously motivated fanatics, and the trends that fuel their recruitment. Moreover, this campaign against extremism goes beyond a narrow security challenge.  Forwhile we’ve degraded methodically core al Qaeda and supported a transition to a sovereignAfghan government, extremist ideology has shifted to other places -- particularly in the MiddleEast and North Africa, where a quarter of young people have no job, where food and watercould grow scarce, where corruption is rampant and sectarian conflicts have becomeincreasingly hard to contain.  
As an international community, we must meet this challenge with a focus on four areas.  First,the terrorist group known as ISIL must be degraded and ultimately destroyed.
This group has terrorized all who they come across in Iraq and Syria.  Mothers, sisters,daughters have been subjected to rape as a weapon of war.  Innocent children have beengunned down.  Bodies have been dumped in mass graves.  Religious minorities have beenstarved to death.  In the most horrific crimes imaginable, innocent human beings have beenbeheaded, with videos of the atrocity distributed to shock the conscience of the world.
No God condones this terror.  No grievance justifies these actions.  There can be no reasoning-- no negotiation -- with this brand of evil.  The only language understood by killers like this isthe language of force.  So the United States of America will work with a broad coalition todismantle this network of death. 
In this effort, we do not act alone -- nor do we intend to send U.S. troops to occupy foreignlands.  Instead, we will support Iraqis and Syrians fighting to reclaim their communities.  Wewill use our military might in a campaign of airstrikes to roll back ISIL.  We will train andequip forces fighting against these terrorists on the ground.  We will work to cut off theirfinancing, and to stop the flow of fighters into and out of the region.  And already, over 40nations have offered to join this coalition. 
Today, I ask the world to join in this effort.
  
Those who have joined ISIL should leave the battlefield while they can.  Those who continueto fight for a hateful cause will find they are increasingly alone.  For we will not succumb tothreats, and we will demonstrate that the future belongs to those who build -- not those whodestroy.  So that's an immediate challenge, the first challenge that we must meet.
The second:  It is time for the world -- especially Muslim communities -- to explicitly,forcefully, and consistently reject the ideology of organizations like al Qaeda and ISIL.
It is one of the tasks of all great religions to accommodate devout faith with a modern,multicultural world.  No children are born hating, and no children -- anywhere -- should beeducated to hate other people.  There should be no more tolerance of so-called clerics whocall upon people to harm innocents because they’re Jewish, or because they're Christian, orbecause they're Muslim.  It is time for a new compact among the civilized peoples of thisworld to eradicate war at its most fundamental source, and that is the corruption of youngminds by violent ideology.
That means cutting off the funding that fuels this hate.  It’s time to end the hypocrisy of thosewho accumulate wealth through the global economy and then siphon funds to those who teachchildren to tear it down.
That means contesting the space that terrorists occupy, including the Internet and socialmedia.  Their propaganda has coerced young people to travel abroad to fight their wars, andturned students -- young people full of potential -- into suicide bombers.  We must offer analternative vision.
That means bringing people of different faiths together.  All religions have been attacked byextremists from within at some point, and all people of faith have a responsibility to lift up thevalue at the heart of all great religions:  Do unto thy neighbor as you would do -- you wouldhave done unto yourself.
The ideology of ISIL or al Qaeda or Boko Haram will wilt and die if it is consistently exposedand confronted and refuted in the light of day.  Look at the new Forum for Promoting Peace inMuslim Societies -- Sheikh bin Bayyah described its purpose:  “We must declare war on war,so the outcome will be peace upon peace.”  Look at the young British Muslims who respondedto terrorist propaganda by starting the “NotInMyName” campaign, declaring, “ISIS is hidingbehind a false Islam.”  Look at the Christian and Muslim leaders who came together in theCentral African Republic to reject violence; listen to the Imam who said, “Politics try to dividethe religious in our country, but religion shouldn’t be a cause of hate, war, or strife.”
Later today, the Security Council will adopt a resolution that underscores the responsibility ofstates to counter violent extremism.  But resolutions must be followed by tangiblecommitments, so we’re accountable when we fall short.
  
Next year, we should all be prepared to announce the concrete steps that we have taken tocounter extremist ideologies in our own countries -- by getting intolerance out of schools,stopping radicalization before it spreads, and promoting institutions and programs that buildnew bridges of understanding.
Third, we must address the cycle of conflict -- especially sectarian conflict -- that creates theconditions that terrorists prey upon.
There is nothing new about wars within religions.  Christianity endured centuries of vicioussectarian conflict.  Today, it is violence within Muslim communities that has become thesource of so much human misery.  It is time to acknowledge the destruction wrought by proxywars and terror campaigns between Sunni and Shia across the Middle East.  And it is time thatpolitical, civic and religious leaders reject sectarian strife.  So let’s be clear:  This is a fightthat no one is winning.  A brutal civil war in Syria has already killed nearly 200,000 people,displaced millions.  Iraq has come perilously close to plunging back into the abyss.  Theconflict has created a fertile recruiting ground for terrorists who inevitably export thisviolence.
The good news is we also see signs that this tide could be reversed.  We have a new, inclusivegovernment in Baghdad; a new Iraqi Prime Minister welcomed by his neighbors; Lebanesefactions rejecting those who try to provoke war.  And these steps must be followed by abroader truce.  Nowhere is this more necessary than Syria. 
Together with our partners, America is training and equipping the Syrian opposition to be acounterweight to the terrorists of ISIL and the brutality of the Assad regime.  But the onlylasting solution to Syria’s civil war is political -- an inclusive political transition that respondsto the legitimate aspirations of all Syrian citizens, regardless of ethnicity, regardless of creed.
Cynics may argue that such an outcome can never come to pass.  But there is no other wayfor this madness to end -- whether one year from now or ten.  And it points to the fact thatit’s time for a broader negotiation in the region in which major powers address theirdifferences directly, honestly, and peacefully across the table from one another, rather thanthrough gun-wielding proxies.  I can promise you America will remain engaged in the region,and we are prepared to engage in that effort.
My fourth and final point is a simple one:  The countries of the Arab and Muslim world mustfocus on the extraordinary potential of their people -- especially the youth.
And here I’d like to speak directly to young people across the Muslim world.  You come from agreat tradition that stands for education, not ignorance; innovation, not destruction; thedignity of life, not murder.  Those who call you away from this path are betraying thistradition, not defending it.
  
You have demonstrated that when young people have the tools to succeed -- good schools,education in math and science, an economy that nurtures creativity and entrepreneurship --then societies will flourish.  So America will partner with those that promote that vision.
Where women are full participants in a country’s politics or economy, societies are more likelyto succeed.  And that’s why we support the participation of women in parliaments and peaceprocesses, schools and the economy.
If young people live in places where the only option is between the dictates of a state, or thelure of an extremist underground, then no counterterrorism strategy can succeed.  But wherea genuine civil society is allowed to flourish -- where people can express their views, andorganize peacefully for a better life -- then you dramatically expand the alternatives to terror.
And such positive change need not come at the expense of tradition and faith.  We see this inIraq, where a young man started a library for his peers.  “We link Iraq’s heritage to theirhearts,” he said, and “give them a reason to stay.”  We see it in Tunisia, where secular andIslamist parties worked together through a political process to produce a new constitution. We see it in Senegal, where civil society thrives alongside a strong democratic government. We see it in Malaysia, where vibrant entrepreneurship is propelling a former colony into theranks of advanced economies.  And we see it in Indonesia, where what began as a violenttransition has evolved into a genuine democracy.  
Now, ultimately, the task of rejecting sectarianism and rejecting extremism is a generationaltask -- and a task for the people of the Middle East themselves.   No external power can bringabout a transformation of hearts and minds.  But America will be a respectful and constructivepartner.  We will neither tolerate terrorist safe havens, nor act as an occupying power.  Wewill take action against threats to our security and our allies, while building an architecture ofcounterterrorism cooperation.  We will increase efforts to lift up those who counter extremistideologies and who seek to resolve sectarian conflict.  And we will expand our programs tosupport entrepreneurship and civil society, education and youth -- because, ultimately, theseinvestments are the best antidote to violence.
We recognize as well that leadership will be necessary to address the conflict betweenPalestinians and Israelis.  As bleak as the landscape appears, America will not give up on thepursuit of peace.  Understand, the situation in Iraq and Syria and Libya should cure anybodyof the illusion that the Arab-Israeli conflict is the main source of problems in the region.  Forfar too long, that's been used as an excuse to distract people from problems at home.  Theviolence engulfing the region today has made too many Israelis ready to abandon the hardwork of peace.  And that's something worthy of reflection within Israel.
Because let’s be clear:  The status quo in the West Bank and Gaza is not sustainable.
  
We cannot afford to turn away from this effort -- not when rockets are fired at innocentIsraelis, or the lives of so many Palestinian children are taken from us in Gaza. So long as Iam President, we will stand up for the principle that Israelis, Palestinians, the region and theworld will be more just and more safe with two states living side by side, in peace andsecurity.
So this is what America is prepared to do:  Taking action against immediate threats, whilepursuing a world in which the need for such action is diminished.  The United States will nevershy away from defending our interests, but we will also not shy away from the promise of thisinstitution and its Universal Declaration of Human Rights -- the notion that peace is notmerely the absence of war, but the presence of a better life. 
I realize that America’s critics will be quick to point out that at times we too have failed to liveup to our ideals; that America has plenty of problems within its own borders.  This is true.  Ina summer marked by instability in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, I know the world alsotook notice of the small American city of Ferguson, Missouri -- where a young man was killed,and a community was divided.  So, yes, we have our own racial and ethnic tensions.  And likeevery country, we continually wrestle with how to reconcile the vast changes wrought byglobalization and greater diversity with the traditions that we hold dear.
But we welcome the scrutiny of the world -- because what you see in America is a countrythat has steadily worked to address our problems, to make our union more perfect, to bridgethe divides that existed at the founding of this nation.  America is not the same as it was 100years ago, or 50 years ago, or even a decade ago.  Because we fight for our ideals, and weare willing to criticize ourselves when we fall short.  Because we hold our leaders accountable,and insist on a free press and independent judiciary.  Because we address our differences inthe open space of democracy -- with respect for the rule of law; with a place for people ofevery race and every religion; and with an unyielding belief in the ability of individual men andwomen to change their communities and their circumstances and their countries for thebetter.
After nearly six years as President, I believe that this promise can help light the world. Because I have seen a longing for positive change -- for peace and for freedom and foropportunity and for the end to bigotry -- in the eyes of young people who I’ve met around theglobe.
They remind me that no matter who you are, or where you come from, or what you look like,or what God you pray to, or who you love, there is something fundamental that we all share. Eleanor Roosevelt, a champion of the UN and America’s role in it, once asked, “Where, afterall, do universal human rights begin?  In small places,” she said, “close to home -- so closeand so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world.  Yet they are the world ofthe individual person; the neighborhood he lives in; the school or college he attends; thefactory, farm or office where he works.”
  
Around the world, young people are moving forward hungry for a better world.  Around theworld, in small places, they're overcoming hatred and bigotry and sectarianism.  And they'relearning to respect each other, despite differences. 
The people of the world now look to us, here, to be as decent, and as dignified, and ascourageous as they are trying to be in their daily lives.  And at this crossroads, I can promiseyou that the United States of America will not be distracted or deterred from what must bedone.  We are heirs to a proud legacy of freedom, and we’re prepared to do what is necessaryto secure that legacy for generations to come.  I ask that you join us in this common mission,for today’s children and tomorrow’s.
Thank you very much.
