As President and Commander in Chief, my highest priority is the security of the Americanpeople.  And on a regular basis, I convene members of my national security team for an in-
depth review of our efforts to prevent terrorist attacks against our citizens -- around the worldand here at home.  We examine any known and emerging threats.  We review our securityposture and we make sure that we’re taking every necessary measure to protect our people.
Today, I wanted to hold our meeting here -- rather than in the Situation Room at the WhiteHouse, I wanted to hold it at the National Counterterrorism Center because this is the hub ofwhere so many of our experts and efforts come together.  And I want to thank our Director ofNational Intelligence Clapper, Jim Clapper, as well as NCTC Director Nick Rasmussen, andeverybody at NCTC -- all of you -- for welcoming us here today.
Now, Nick, along with CIA Director Brennan and FBI Director Comey, provided a threatbriefing.  And Director Comey and Attorney General Lynch updated us on the investigationinto the San Bernardino attacks.  I reiterated that the investigation will continue to have thefull support of the federal government and that we should leave no stone unturned indetermining why and how these terrorists carried out that tragedy.  Secretary of HomelandSecurity Johnson updated us on the measures we’re taking here at home to increaseawareness, stay vigilant, and enhance the safety of the traveling public, especially with somany Americans traveling during the holidays.
  
After the terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, I know that a lot of Americans wereanxious.  And that’s understandable.  It’s natural.  What matters most to all of us are ourfriends and our families and our communities and their safety.  That's true of folks inside ofgovernment as well as outside of government.  But here’s what I want every American toknow.  Since 9/11, we’ve taken extraordinary steps to strengthen our homeland security --our borders, our ports, our airports, our aviation security, including enhanced watch lists andscreening.  And we’ve gotten much better -- thanks in part to the people in this room -- ofpreventing large, complex attacks like 9/11.
Moreover -- and I think everybody here will agree -- we have the very best intelligence,counterterrorism, homeland security and law enforcement professionals in the world.  Ourfolks are the best.  Across our government, these dedicated professionals, including here atNCTC, are relentless, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.  At the operations center here, peoplefrom across our government work, literally shoulder-to-shoulder, pouring over the latestinformation, analyzing it, integrating it, connecting the dots.  They’re sharing information --pushing it out across the federal government and, just as importantly, to our state and localpartners.  In other words, what you see here today is one, strong, united team.
So our professionals have a remarkable record of success.  Of course, when terrorists pull offa despicable act like what happened in San Bernardino it tears at our hearts.  But it alsostiffens our resolve to learn whatever lessons we can and to make any improvements that areneeded.  In the meantime, what the world doesn’t always see are the successes -- thoseterrorist plots that have been prevented.  And that’s how it should be.  This work oftentimesdemands secrecy.  But as Americans, we should not forget how good these patriots are.  Overthe years, they have taken countless terrorists off the battlefield.  They have disrupted plots. They’ve thwarted attacks.  They have saved American lives.
And so, for everybody who is involved in our counterterrorism efforts, I want to say thankyou, and the American people thank you.
I want to repeat what my team just told me.  At this moment, our intelligence andcounterterrorism professionals do not have any specific and credible information about anattack on the homeland.  That said, we have to be vigilant.  As I indicated in my address tothe nation last week, we are in a new phase of terrorism, including lone actors and smallgroups of terrorists, like those in San Bernardino.  Because they are smaller, often self-
initiating, self-motivating, they’re harder to detect, and that makes it harder to prevent.
But just as the threat evolves, so do we.  We’re constantly adapting, constantly improving,upping our game, getting better. And today, the mission to protect our homeland goes on, onthree main fronts. First, we’re going after terrorists over there, where they plot and plan andspew their propaganda.  As I described at the Pentagon, we’re hitting ISIL harder than ever inSyria and Iraq. We are taking out their leaders.  Our partners on the ground are fighting topush ISIL back, and ISIL has been losing territory.
  
Our Special Operations Forces are hard at work.  We took out the ISIL leader in Libya.  We’vetaken out terrorists in Yemen and Somalia.  So we're sending a message:  If you targetAmericans, you will have no safe haven.  We will find you, and we will defend our nation.
Meanwhile, as always, we're working to protect Americans overseas -- including our militarybases and servicemembers.  And Secretary John Kerry updated us on security at ourembassies and our diplomatic posts.
Second, we continue to do everything in our power to prevent terrorists from getting into theUnited States.  We're doing more with countries around the world, including our Europeanpartners, to prevent the flow of foreign terrorist fighters -- both to places like Syria and Iraq,and back into our countries.
We're implementing additional layers of security for visitors who come here under the VisaWaiver Program and we're working with Congress to make further improvements.  Anyrefugee coming to the United States -- some of them victims of terrorism themselves -- willcontinue to get the most intensive scrutiny of any arrival.  They go through up to two years ofvetting, including biometric screening.  And the review that I ordered into the fiancé visaprogram, under which the female terrorist in San Bernardino came here, is ongoing.
Third, we're stepping up our efforts to prevent attacks here at home.  As I said, the NCTC isconstantly sharing information with our state and local partners.  Across the country morethan 100 joint terrorism task forces are the action arm of this fight -- federal, state, and localexperts all working together to disrupt threats.  At the state level, fusion cells are receivingtips and pushing information out to local law enforcement.  Just yesterday the Department ofHomeland Security updated its alert system to make sure Americans are getting the mosttimely and useful information.
And with groups like ISIL trying to radicalize people to violence, especially online, part of ourmeeting today focused on how we can continue to strengthen our partnership between lawenforcement, high-tech leaders, communities, faith leaders, and citizens.  We’ve got to keepon building up trust and cooperation that helps communities inoculate themselves from thekind of propaganda that ISIL is spewing out, preventing their loved ones -- especially youngpeople -- from succumbing to terrorist ideologies in the first place.
And finally, one of our greatest weapons against terrorism is our own strength and resilienceas a people.  That means staying vigilant -- if you see something suspicious, say something tolaw enforcement.  It also means staying united as one American family -- remembering thatour greatest allies in this fight are each other, Americans of all faiths and all backgrounds. And when Americans stand together, nothing can beat us.
Most of all, we cannot give in to fear, or change how we live our lives, because that's whatterrorists want.  That's the only leverage that they have.  They can't defeat us on a battlefield,but they can lead us to change in ways that would undermine what this country is all about.
  
And that's what we have to guard against.  We have to remind ourselves that when we staytrue to our values, nothing can beat us.
So anyone trying to harm Americans need to know -- they need to know that we're strong andthat we're resilient, that we will not be terrorized.  We’ve prevailed over much greater threatsthan this.  We will prevail again.
So I want to once again thank all of you at NCTC and every one of your home agencies acrossour entire government for your extraordinary service.  I want every American to know -- asyou go about the holidays, as you travel and gather with family, and the kids open theirpresents, and as you ring in the New Year -- that you've got dedicated patriots workingaround the clock all across the country to protect us all.  Oftentimes they're doing so bysacrificing their own holidays and their own time with families.  But they care about thisdeeply.  And they're the best in the world.  And for that, we're very grateful.
Thank you, everybody.
Happy holidays.
