Well thank you, Senator Cornyn, Governor Perry, President Starr, gathered dignitaries, thecommunity of Baylor and Waco -- most of all, the family and the friends and neighbors ofWest, Texas.
I cannot match the power of the voices you just heard on that video. And no wordsadequately describe the courage that was displayed on that deadly night. What I can do isoffer the love and support and prayers of the nation.
The Book of Psalms tells us:
For you, O God, have tested us; you have tried us. We went through fire and throughwater; yet you have brought us out to a place of abundance.
We went through fire and through water; yet you have brought us out to a place ofabundance.1
For this state, and for our country, these have been trying and difficult days. We gather herein Texas to mourn the brave men who went through fire and all those who have been takenfrom us. We remain mindful of our fellow Americans in flooded states to the north who endurethe high waters. We pray for those in Boston who have been tested, and the wounded whosegreatest tests still lie ahead.
  
But know this: While the eyes of the world may have been fixed on places far away, ourhearts have also been here in your time of tribulation. And even amidst such sorrow and somuch pain, we recognize God’s abundance. We give thanks for the courage and thecompassion and the incredible grace of the people of West.
We're grateful for Mayor Muska and Mayor Duncan, and all those who have shown suchleadership during this tragedy. And to the families and neighbors grappling with unbearableloss, we are here to say, you are not alone. You are not forgotten. We may not all live here inTexas, but we're neighbors, too. We're Americans, too, and we stand with you, and we do notforget. And we'll be there even after the cameras leave and after the attention turnselsewhere. Your country will remain ever ready to help you recover and rebuild and reclaimyour community.
Now until last week, I think it’s fair to say that few outside this state had ever heard ofWest. And I suspect that’s the way most people in West like it. Now, it is true that wearytravelers, and now the wider world, know they can rely on the Czech Stop for a brief respite inthe middle of a long stretch of highway. I want to say, by the way, all the former Presidents inDallas send their thoughts and prayers, George W. and Laura Bush spoke longingly about thekolaches -- and the even better company, as they’ve driven through West. And what -- whatthey understood, and what all of you understand, is what makes West special is not theattention coming from far-flung places. What makes West special, what -- what puts it on themap is what makes it familiar: the people who live there; neighbors you can count on; placesthat haven’t changed; things that are solid and true and lasting.
Most of the people in West know everybody in West. Many of you are probably descendedfrom some of those first settlers -- hardy immigrants who crossed an ocean and kept ongoing. So for you, there’s no such thing as a stranger. When someone's in need, you reachout to them and you support them and you do what it takes to help them carry on.
And that’s what happened last Wednesday, when a fire alarm sounded across a quiet Texasevening. As we’ve heard, the call went out to volunteers -- not professionals -- people whojust love to serve, people who want to help their neighbors. A call went out to farmers and carsalesmen and welders and funeral home directors; the city secretary and the mayor. It wentout to folks who are tough enough and selfless enough to put in a full day’s work and then beready for more.
And together, you answered the call. You dropped your schoolwork, left your families, jumpedin fire trucks, and rushed to the flames. And when you got to the scene, you forgot fear andyou fought that blaze as hard as you could, knowing the danger, buying time so others couldescape.  And then, about 20 minutes after the first alarm, the earth shook, and the sky wentdark -- and West changed forever.
  
Today our prayers are with the families of all who we’ve lost -- the proud sons and daughtersof West whose memories will live on in our hearts.  Parents who loved their kids, and leaderswho served their communities.  They were young and old, from different backgrounds anddifferent walks of life.  A few were just going about their business.  An awful lot ran towardsthe scene of disaster trying to help.  One was described as the kind of guy whose phone wasalways ringing with folks in need of help -- help he always provided.  That’s just who thesefolks were.
Our thoughts are with those who face a long road -- the wounded, the heartbroken, thefamilies who lost their homes and possessions in an instant.  They’re going to need theirfriends in West, but they’re also going to need their friends in Texas, and their friends allacross this country.  They’ll still need you to answer that call.  They will need those things thatare lasting and true.  For, as Scripture teaches us, "a friend loves at all times, and a brother isborn for adversity."
To the people of West, just as we’ve seen the love you share in better times, as friends andbrothers and sisters, these hard days have shown your ability to stand tall in times ofunimaginable adversity.
You saw it in leaders like Mayor Muska, who lost close friends.  And you saw it in the hospitalstaff who spent the night treating people that they knew -- toiling through their tears as theydid what had to be done.
We saw it in the folks who helped evacuate an entire nursing home, including one man whodrove an elderly resident to safety and then came back to do it again, twice. 
We saw it in the people so generous that when the Red Cross set up a shelter for folks whocouldn’t go back to their homes, not that many people showed up, because most had alreadybeen offered a place to stay with their friends and family and neighbors. 
Complete strangers drove from hundreds of miles to donate supplies.  Firefighters fromsurrounding communities manned the stations so surviving volunteers could recover fromtheir wounds.  Right here at Baylor, students stood in line for hours to give blood.  And anearby school district opened its doors to the students who can’t go back to their classrooms,putting welcome signs on lockers and in the hallways.
So that's the thing about this tragedy.  This small town’s family is bigger now.  It extendsbeyond the boundaries of West.  And in the days ahead, this love and support will be moreimportant than ever, because there will be moments of doubt and pain and the temptation towonder how this community will ever fully recover.  And the families who have lost suchremarkable men of the sort that we saw in that video, there are going to be times where theysimply don't understand how this could have happened.
  
But today I see in the people of West, in your eyes, that what makes West special isn't goingto go away.  And instead of changing who you are, this tragedy has simply revealed whoyou’ve always been.
It’s the courage of Deborah Sulak, who works as a cashier just around the corner from the firestation.  She said, “It’s going to be tough for the families.  But we’re going to reboundbecause we’re fighters.”  And that courage will bring West back.
It’s the love of Carla Ruiz, who used to live in West but now lives in Austin.  And last week,she drove all the way back.  “I had to be here,” she said.  “You have to be here for family.” That love will keep West going.
It’s the faith of someone like Pastor John Crowder that will sustain the good people of West foras long as it takes.  His church was damaged in the explosion.  So on Sunday, thecongregation assembled outside.  "What happened Wednesday was awful,” he told them. “But God is bigger than all of this."  God is bigger than all of this and he is here with you inWest.  He is bigger than all of this and he is here with you.
Going forward, it’s not just your town that needs your courage and your love and your faith. America does, too.  We need towns where if you don’t know what your kids are up to, thenchances are your neighbors do too, and they'll tell on those kids in a second.  America needstowns that holds fundraisers to help folks pay the medical bills and then take the time to dropoff a home-cooked meal, because they know a family is under stress.  America needscommunities where there’s always somebody to call if your car gets stuck or your house getsflooded.  We need people who so love their neighbors as themselves that they’re willing to laydown their lives for them.
America needs towns like West.  That’s what makes this country great, is towns like West. "For you, O God, have tested us; you have tried us.  We went through fire and through water;yet you have brought us out to a place of abundance."
You have been tested, West.  You have been tried.  You have gone through fire.  But you areand always will be surrounded by an abundance of love.  You saw it in the voices on thosevideos.  You see it in the firefighters and first responders who are here.  All across America,people are praying for you and thinking of you.  And when they see the faces of thosefamilies, they understand that these are not strangers -- these are neighbors.  And that’s whywe know that we will get through this. 
God bless West. May God grant His peace on those that we’ve lost, His comfort to theirfamilies. May He continue to bless this great state of Texas, and may He continue to blessthese United States of America.
1 Psalm 66:10-12. Some portions unstated.
