Thank you so much. Good afternoon. Bon après-midi. And guten tag. It is a great honor for me to be here inEurope, to be here in Strasbourg. I want to make just a few acknowledgements. I want to thank thePresident of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, for being such a terrific friend. I want to thank his wife, MadamSarkozy. They just hosted us at the palace and could not have been more gracious.
I want to thank the Charge d'Affaires, Mark Pekala, and his wife, Maria, who were helping to organize us;Vincent Carver, who's the Counsel General in Strasbourg. And I want to thank the Mayor of Strasbourg,Roland Ries, for his hospitality.
It is wonderful to be here with all of you and to have an opportunity not only to speak to you but also to takesome questions. You know, oftentimes during these foreign trips you see everything from behind a window,and what we thought was important was for me to have an opportunity to not only speak with you but also tohear from you, because that's ultimately how we can learn about each other. But before I take somequestions, I hope you don't mind me making a few remarks about my country and yours; the relationshipbetween the United States and the relationship between Europe.
Strasbourg has been known throughout history as a city at the crossroads. Over thousands of years, youstraddled many kingdoms and many cultures. Two rivers are joined here. Two religions have flourished inyour churches. Three languages comprise an ancient oath that bears the city's name. You served as acenter of industry and commerce, a seat of government and education, where Goethe studied and Pasteurtaught and Gutenberg imagined his printing press.
So it's fitting because we find ourselves at a crossroads as well -- all of us -- for we've arrived at a momentwhere each nation and every citizen must choose at last how we respond to a world that has grown smallerand more connected than at any time in its existence.

We've known for a long time that the revolutions in communications and technology that took place in the20th century would hold out enormous promise for the 21st century -- the promise of broader prosperity andmobility; of new breakthroughs and discoveries that could help us lead richer and fuller lives. But the sameforces that have brought us closer together have also given rise to new dangers that threaten to tear ourworld apart -- dangers that cannot be contained by the nearest border or the furthest ocean.
Even with the Cold War now over, the spread of nuclear weapons or the theft of nuclear material could leadto the extermination of any city on the planet. And this weekend in Prague, I will lay out an agenda to seekthe goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
We also know that the pollution from cars in Boston or from factories in Beijing are melting the ice caps inthe Arctic, and that that will disrupt weather patterns everywhere. The terrorists who struck in London, inNew York, plotted in distant caves and simple apartments much closer to your home. And the recklessspeculation of bankers that has new fueled a global economic downturn that's inflicting pain on workers andfamilies is happening everywhere all across the globe.
The economic crisis has proven the fact of our interdependence in the most visible way yet. Not more than ageneration ago, it would have been difficult to imagine that the inability of somebody to pay for a house inFlorida could contribute to the failure of the banking system in Iceland. Today what's difficult to imagine isthat we did not act sooner to shape our future.
Now, there's plenty of blame to go around for what has happened, and the United States certainly shares its-- shares blame for what has happened. But every nation bears responsibility for what lies ahead, especiallynow, for whether it's the recession or climate change, or terrorism, or drug trafficking, poverty, or theproliferation of nuclear weapons, we have learned that without a doubt there's no quarter of the globe thatcan wall itself off from the threats of the 21st century.
The one way forward -- the only way forward -- is through a common and persistent effort to combat fearand want wherever they exist. That is the challenge of our time -- and we can not fail to meet it, together.
Now, we take for granted the peace of a Europe that's united, but for centuries Strasbourg has beenattacked and occupied and claimed by the warring nations of this continent. Now, today in this city, thepresence of the European Parliament and the Council of Europe stand as symbols of a Europe that is unitedpeaceful and free.
Now, we take this peace and prosperity for granted, but this destination was not easily reached, nor was itpredestined. The buildings that are now living monuments to European unity were not drawn from simpleblueprints. They were born out of the blood of the first half of the 20th century and the resolve of the second.Men and women had to have the imagination to see a better future, and the courage to reach for it.Europeans and Americans had to have the sense of common purpose to join one another, and the patienceand the persistence to see a long twilight struggle through.

It was 61 years ago this April that a Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe helped to deliver hope to a continentthat had been decimated by war. Amid the ashes and the rubble that surrounded so many cities like thisone, America joined with you in an unprecedented effort that secured a lasting prosperity not just in Europe,but around the world -- on both sides of the Atlantic.
One year later, exactly 60 years ago tomorrow, we ensured our shared security when 12 of our nationssigned a treaty in Washington that spelled out a simple agreement: An attack on one would be viewed as anattack on all. Without firing a single shot, this Alliance would prevent the Iron Curtain from descending onthe free nations of Western Europe. It would lead eventually to the crumbling of a wall in Berlin and the endof the Communist threat. Two decades later, with 28 member nations that stretched from the Baltic to theMediterranean, NATO remains the strongest alliance that the world has ever known.
At the crossroads where we stand today, this shared history gives us hope -- but it must not give us rest.This generation cannot stand still. We cannot be content merely to celebrate the achievements of the 20thcentury, or enjoy the comforts of the 21st century; we must learn from the past to build on its success. Wemust renew our institutions, our alliances. We must seek the solutions to the challenges of this youngcentury.
This is our generation. This is our time. And I am confident that we can meet any challenge as long as weare together.
Such an effort is never easy. It's always harder to forge true partnerships and sturdy alliances than to actalone, or to wait for the action of somebody else. It's more difficult to break down walls of division than tosimply allow our differences to build and our resentments to fester. So we must be honest with ourselves. Inrecent years we've allowed our Alliance to drift. I know that there have been honest disagreements overpolicy, but we also know that there's something more that has crept into our relationship. In America, there'sa failure to appreciate Europe's leading role in the world. Instead of celebrating your dynamic union andseeking to partner with you to meet common challenges, there have been times where America has shownarrogance and been dismissive, even derisive.
But in Europe, there is an anti-Americanism that is at once casual but can also be insidious. Instead ofrecognizing the good that America so often does in the world, there have been times where Europeanschoose to blame America for much of what's bad.
On both sides of the Atlantic, these attitudes have become all too common. They are not wise. They do notrepresent the truth. They threaten to widen the divide across the Atlantic and leave us both more isolated.They fail to acknowledge the fundamental truth that America cannot confront the challenges of this centuryalone, but that Europe cannot confront them without America.
So I've come to Europe this week to renew our partnership, one in which America listens and learns fromour friends and allies, but where our friends and allies bear their share of the burden. Together, we mustforge common solutions to our common problems.

So let me say this as clearly as I can: America is changing, but it cannot be America alone that changes. Weare confronting the greatest economic crisis since World War II. The only way to confront thisunprecedented crisis is through unprecedented coordination.
Over the last few days, I believe that we have begun that effort. The G20 summit in London was a successof nations coming together, working out their differences, and moving boldly forward. All of us are movingaggressively to restore growth and lending. All of us have agreed to the most substantial overhaul of ourinternational financial system in a generation. No one is exempt. No more will the world's financial playersbe able to make risky bets at the expense of ordinary people. Those days are over. We are ushering a newera of responsibility, and that is something we should all be proud of.
As we take these steps, we also affirm that we must not erect new barriers to commerce; that trade warshave no victors. We can't give up on open markets, even as we work to ensure that trade is both free andfair. We cannot forget how many millions that trade has lifted out of poverty and into the middle class. Wecan't forget that part of the freedom that our nations stood for throughout the Cold War was the opportunitythat comes from free enterprise and individual liberty.
I know it can be tempting to turn inward, and I understand how many people and nations have been leftbehind by the global economy. And that's why the United States is leading an effort to reach out to peoplearound the world who are suffering, to provide them immediate assistance and to extend support for foodsecurity that will help them lift themselves out of poverty.
All of us must join together in this effort, not just because it is right, but because by providing assistance tothose countries most in need, we will provide new markets, we will drive the growth of the future that lifts allof us up. So it's not just charity; it's a matter of understanding that our fates are tied together -- not just thefate of Europe and America, but the fate of the entire world.
And as we restore our common prosperity, we must stand up for our common security. As we meet heretoday, NATO has still embarked on its first mission overseas in Afghanistan, and my administration has justcompleted a review of our policy in that region.
Now, I understand that this war has been long. Our allies have already contributed greatly to this endeavor.You've sent your sons and daughters to fight alongside ours, and we honor and respect their service andsacrifice.
And I also know that there's some who have asked questions about why are we still in Afghanistan? Whatdoes this mean? What's its purpose? Understand we would not deploy our own troops if this mission wasnot indispensable to our common security. As President, I can tell you there's no decision more difficult,there's no duty more painful, than signing a letter to the family of somebody who has died in war.
So I understand that there is doubt about this war in Europe. There's doubt at times even in the UnitedStates. But know this: The United States of America did not choose to fight a war in Afghanistan. We wereattacked by an al Qaeda network that killed thousands on American soil, including French and Germans.Along the border of Afghanistan and Pakistan, those terrorists are still plotting today. And they're -- if there isanother al Qaeda attack, it is just as likely, if not more, that it will be here in Europe in a European city.

So I've made a commitment to Afghanistan, and I've asked our NATO partners for more civilian and militarysupport and assistance. We do this with a clear purpose: to root out the terrorists who threaten all of us, totrain the Afghan people to sustain their own security and to help them advance their own opportunity, and toquicken the day when our troops come home.
We have no interest in occupying Afghanistan. We have more than enough to do in rebuilding America. Butthis is a mission that tests whether nations can come together in common purpose on behalf of our commonsecurity. That's what we did together in the 20th century. And now we need an alliance that is even strongerthan when it brought down a mighty wall in Berlin.
That's why we applaud France's decision to expand and deepen its participation in NATO, just as wesupport a strong European defense. That's why we welcome Croatia and Albania into the fold. And that iswhy we must ensure that NATO is equipped and capable of facing down the threats and challenges of thisnew age. This is one of our central tasks.
And we also know that in the 21st century, security is more complex than military power. This is thegeneration that must also stop the spread of the pollution that is slowly killing our planet, from shrinkingcoastlines and devastating storms to widespread misery and famine and drought. The effects of climatechange are now in plain sight.
Europe has acted with a seriousness of purpose that this challenge demands. And in the last few monthsI'm proud to say that America has begun to take unprecedented steps to transform the way that we useenergy. We appointed a special envoy to help us lead a global effort to reduce the carbon that we send inthe atmosphere.
But we all know that time is running out. And that means that America must do more. Europe must do more.China and India must do more. Rolling back the tide of a warming planet is a responsibility that we have toourselves, to our children, and all of those who will inherit God's creation long after we are gone. So let usmeet that responsibility together. I am confident that we can meet it. But we have to begin today.
And let us resolve that when future generations look back on ours, they will be able to say that we did ourpart to make this world more peaceful.
It's perhaps the most difficult work of all to resolve age-old conflicts, to heal ancient hatreds, to dissolve thelines of suspicion between religions and cultures, and people who may not look like us, or have the samefaith that we do, or come from the same place. But just because it's difficult does not make the work anyless important. It does not absolve us from trying.
And to that end, America will sustain our effort to forge and secure a lasting peace between the Israelis andthe Palestinians. I've sent a clear message to the leaders and peoples of Iran that while we have realdifferences, we also have mutual interests, and we seek new engagement based on mutual respect. And itis in that spirit that America and Europe must reach out to the vast majority of Muslims in our nations and inall nations. We seek only hope of peace and partnership, and the opportunity of a better life.

We cannot simply solve these conflicts militarily. We have to open our minds and we have to open ourhearts to the differences among us and the commonalities between us. With every threat that we face, anew day is possible. We can't get there alone. As it was in the darkest days after World War II, when acontinent lay in ruins and an atomic cloud had settled over the world, we must make the journey together.
We know that transformational change is possible. We know this because of three reasons: First, because,for all our differences, there are certain values that bind us together and reveal our common humanity: theuniversal longing to live a life free from fear, and free from want; a life marked by dignity and respect andsimple justice.
Our two republics were founded in service of these ideals. In America, it is written into our foundingdocuments as "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." In France: "Liberté" -- absolutely -- "egalité,fraternité." Our moral authority is derived from the fact that generations of our citizens have fought and bledto uphold these values in our nations and others.
And that's why we can never sacrifice them for expedience's sake. That's why I've ordered the closing of thedetention center in Guantanamo Bay. That's why I can stand here today and say without equivocation orexception that the United States of America does not and will not torture.
The second way that we can turn challenge into opportunity is through our persistence in the face ofdifficulty. In an age of instant gratification, it's tempting to believe that every problem can and should besolved in the span of a week. When these problems aren't solved, we conclude that our efforts to solvethem must have been in vain. But that's not how progress is made. Progress is slow. It comes in fits andstarts, because we try and we fail and then we try something else. And when there are setbacks anddisappointments we keep going. We hold firm to our core values, and we hold firm to our faith in oneanother.
The third reason we know that we can change this world is because of men and women like the youngpeople who are here today. Each time we find ourselves at a crossroads, paralyzed by worn debates andstale thinking, the old ways of doing things, a new generation rises up and shows the way forward. AsRobert Kennedy once told a crowd of students in South Africa, "It is a revolutionary world that we live in, andthus, it is young people who must take the lead." Because young people are unburdened by the biases orprejudices of the past. That is a great privilege of youth. But it's also a tremendous responsibility because itis you who must ultimately decide what we do with this incredible moment in history.
We just emerged from an era marked by irresponsibility, and it would be easy to choose the path ofselfishness or apathy, of blame or division. But that is a danger that we cannot afford. The challenges aretoo great. It is a revolutionary world that we live in, and history shows us that we can do improbable,sometimes impossible things. We stand here in a city that used to stand at the center of European conflict;only now it is the center of European union. We did that together. Now we must not give up on one another.We must renew this relationship for a new generation, in a new century. We must hold firm to our commonvalues, hold firm to our faith in one another. Together, I'm confident that we can achieve the promise of anew day.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much.

Please, everybody have a seat. So the way this works -- do we have microphones in the audience? Yes?So just raise your hand if you want a question, and I will call on you. I think we have some translators. If youwant to speak French and German, my French and German are terrible. But we have people who speakvery good French and very good German who will translate your question, and translate my answer. And Iwill try to get as many questions as I can get in, in the remaining 20 minutes or so that we have.
And I will start with this young lady right here. Yes, you, right there. Please introduce yourself. Hold on, Ican't hear you yet. Can we increase the sound on the mic? Let's try again. Oh, I called -- now, I just want tosay I did not call on the American on purpose.
Q [Inaudible.]
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, after only two months, that's kind of a big question. But here's what I would liketo see. And, look, you aim high knowing that you'll make mistakes and sometimes you'll fall short.
Number one, my first task is to restore the economy of the United States, but, in concert with other nations,to restore global economic growth. That's my number one task, because we are going through the worstcrisis since the 1930s.
That means that not only do we have to fix the banking system, put common-sense regulations in place toprevent a crisis like this from ever happening again, making sure that we are keeping trade relationshipsbetween countries open -- but it also means helping developing countries and poor countries who, throughno fault of their own, have been devastated by this crisis, and if we allow them to collapse will ultimately bea drag on our ability to prosper.
Emerging markets have actually been the drivers of economic growth over the last several years. If we canget millions of Chinese to prosper, that is ultimately good for us. If we can get all the Indians in poverty tosuddenly be able to buy a refrigerator or send their children to college, that will raise everybody's livingstandards, because those will be enormous new markets for all of us.
So what I want to be able to do is not only fix the immediate crisis, but, working in partnership with othercountries, create a path for sustainable, responsible growth. And I think we can do that. There are a lot ofpeople who benefit from globalization, but there are also people who have been harmed by globalization.Globalization in and of itself can be good, but can also be destructive.
If we create the right framework so that what happened in the banking system can't happen again, thenglobalization can be good for everybody and lift everybody's living standards up. And by the way, historyhas shown us that we are most vulnerable to war and conflict when people are desperate economically. Andnobody knows that history more than Europe.

So that would be number one. Number two is I would like to be able to say that as a consequence of mywork, that we drastically lessened the threat of not only terrorism but also nuclear terrorism. And we can'treduce the threat of a nuclear weapon going off unless those who possess the most nuclear weapons -- theUnited States and Russia -- take serious steps to actually reduce our stockpiles.
So we are going to -- so we want to pursue that vigorously in the years ahead. And I had a excellentmeeting with President Medvedev of Russia to get started that process of reducing our nuclear stockpiles,which will then give us greater moral authority to say to Iran, don't develop a nuclear weapon; to say toNorth Korea, don't proliferate nuclear weapons.
In my own country, what I think is very important is that we finally get a health care system that is reliableand cost-effective. That's something that -- you know, that's a social safety net that exits in almost all ofEurope that doesn't exist in the United States. You have millions of people who work hard every single day,but if they get sick they could potentially lose everything. And in a country as wealthy as ours, that's notacceptable to me.
So we are going to work hard to make sure that we have a health care system that won't be identical towhat you have in Europe -- each country has its own traditions and approaches -- but that provides peoplequality, affordable, accessible health care.
And then, I would like to see us in the United States take the lead on a new approach to energy -- becausenone of the developed countries are going to be able to sustain their growth if we don't start using energydifferently, and the world cannot survive all countries using energy in the same ways that we use it.
I was meeting with the Indian Prime Minister yesterday after the summit -- a very good and wise man, PrimeMinister Singh -- and he was talking about how Indian growth rates have gone up 9 percent every year.They need to grow at that pace in order to bring hundreds of millions of people in their country out of abjectpoverty, desperate poverty. They have to grow at a rapid pace.
Now, he actually is committed to working towards dealing with the climate change issue, but he made a verysimple point, which is a point that I understood before the meeting and all of us should not forget -- and thatis that you cannot expect poor countries, or relatively poor countries, to be partners with us on climatechange if we are not taking the lead, given that our carbon footprint is many times more than theirs percapita. I mean, each one of us in the developed world, I don't care how environmentally conscious you are,how green you are -- I'm sure there are some green folks here --
Q Yes!
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Yes! I don't care how green you are, you are -- you have a much bigger carbonfootprint than the average Indian, or the average person from China. And so we in developed countries then-- it's critical for us to lead by example by becoming more energy efficient, and we also have to harnesstechnology and shared scientific breakthroughs in order to find more sustainable energy patterns.
Now, I've got other things that I want to do, but that's a pretty long list. Let me go on to a few morequestions.

All right, now, I know there's some other Americans in the crowd. But do me a favor, Americans, wait till weget back home and I'll do a town hall there -- because I want to hear from my French and German andEuropean friends. All right. And -- wait, wait, wait -- this gentleman right here in the glasses.
Q Thank you, Mr. President. I'm a student from Heidelberg, Germany, and -- my mother tongue is German,but my French is not good enough, so I ask my question in English.
You mentioned in your speech that we are a lucky generation. We live in peace, we live in democracies andfree states, and we really -- we are very pleased to have this situation in Europe. But this is not the case allover the world, even not in Europe. Look to Belarus, for example; there's an autocratic regime.
And so my question concerns the many children all over the world that live in poverty, under human rightsviolation. They have hunger, they have no education, and other problems. So what is your strategy, Mr.President, to solve this problem?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, it's an excellent question, and the -- first of all, I think one of the things that weshould be very proud of from the G20 summit yesterday was that we made a significant commitment toadditional resources through the IMF and other mechanisms to provide assistance to emerging markets andpoor countries that, as I said, are bearing the burden of a collapse in the financial system that they hadnothing to do with.
The problem is so many of these countries had export-oriented markets, and when the economiescontracted in our developing nations, it made them extremely vulnerable. You know, you have a country likeBotswana, which is actually a well-managed country that has made enormous progress, but their mainrevenue generator is diamond sales, and they have literally seen the diamond market collapse -- in partbecause they couldn't get trade financing, in part because the demand in developed countries has droppedoff. So we started to make progress there. Our most important task right now is helping them get throughthis crisis.
Over the long term, though, we've got to have a strategy that recognizes that the interest of the developedworld in feeding the hungry, in educating children, that that's not just charity; it's in our interest. There's not adirect correlation between poverty and violence and conflict and terrorism. But I can tell you that if childrenhave no education whatsoever, if young men are standing idle each and every day, and feel completelydetached and completely removed from the modern world, they are more likely, they are more susceptibleto ideologies that appeal to violence and destruction.
If you have no health facilities whatsoever in countries in Africa, these days a pandemic can get on a planeand be in Strasbourg or New York City or Chicago overnight. So we better think about making sure thatthere are basic public health facilities and public health infrastructure in those countries, because we can'tshield ourselves from these problems. So that means developed countries have to increase aid, but it alsomeans that the countries who are receiving aid have to use it wisely.

My father was from Kenya. And when I traveled to Kenya -- I had just been elected to the United StatesSenate -- everybody was very excited and they greeted me as if I was already a head of state, and therewere people waving and lining the streets. I went to speak at a university and I had to be honest, which was,America has an obligation to provide Kenya help on a whole range of issues, but if Kenya doesn't solve itsown corruption problem, then Kenya will never grow. It will never be able to provide for its own.
And so there's nothing wrong with the developed nations insisting that we will increase our commitments,that we will design our aid programs more effectively, that we will open up our markets to trade from poorcountries, but that we will also insist that there is good governance and rule of law, and other critical factorsin order to make these countries work.
We spend so much time talking about democracy -- and obviously we should be promoting democracyeverywhere we can. But democracy, a well-functioning society that promotes liberty and equality andfraternity, a well-functioning society does not just depend on going to the ballot box. It also means thatyou're not going to be shaken down by police because the police aren't getting properly paid. It also meansthat if you want to start a business, you don't have to pay a bribe. I mean, there are a whole host of otherfactors that people need to -- need to recognize in building a civil society that allows a country to besuccessful. And hopefully that will -- that approach will be reflected not just in my administration's policiesbut in the policies that are pursued by international agencies around the world. Okay, good.
All right, right up -- I've got two of you, so you have to choose one. Which one should I call on? I don't wantto -- you're standing right next to each other. Oops. Well, I'm sorry, you know what, he actually called on the-- no, no, no, I was actually pointing down here. I didn't see those two ladies back there. Here you go, thisone right here. Go ahead.
Q Well, hello, Mr. President. I'm sorry, I'm from Chicago, excuse me.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Are you?
Q I'm also a student in the high school -- the international high school --
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, no, I'm sorry, if you're American I can't -- 
Q I'm also French.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Wait, wait, wait, wait, hold on. She said she's also French. What does that mean?
Q Double nationality.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Dual nationality. What do you think, should we let her ask the question? Okay, goahead.

Q Thank you. Do you think that the economic crisis is an opportunity to restructure our industries in anecological and sustainable way? And I also was wondering whether the dog was already in the White Houseor not.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: The -- we are getting a dog. This is a very important question in the United States --what kind of dog we're getting and when we're getting it. It should be there soon.
I do think that in crisis there's always opportunity if it's used properly. So, for example, in the United Stateswe decided to pass a large stimulus package to help growth at a time when the private sector was having avery difficult time.
Now, we could have just spent the money on the same old ways of doing things, but part of what we'vedecided was, if we're going to be spending a lot of government money anyway, why not spend it to doublethe amount of renewable energy? Why not spend it on retrofitting existing government buildings so that wedrastically reduce their energy consumption? Why not start building high-speed rail?
One thing that, as an American who is proud as anybody of my country, I am always jealous aboutEuropean trains. And I said to myself, why can't we have -- why can't we have high-speech rail? And sowe're investing in that as well.
So on the transportation front, on -- with respect to building construction, on a whole range of issues, we areinvesting in new technologies that will make us more energy efficient. And that is one of the building blocksthat's needed in order for us to reduce our carbon footprint and to work with other countries to achieve theclimate change goals that I think are going to be so important.
I'm getting the signal that I've only got time for two more questions. Oh! I'm going to ask that young man inthe suit -- because he got dressed up today. I know he doesn't usually wear a suit -- yes. Go ahead, goahead.
Q I just want to know what do you expect from the French and the European countries regarding the war onterror?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Good. That's a good question. Look, I think that over the last seven, eight years, as Isaid in my speech, a lot of tensions have developed between the United States and Europe. And one of thelegacies, I hope, from my administration is, is that we start bringing our historic alliance back together in amuch more effective way.
Now, that doesn't mean that we're not going to have honest disagreements. All countries havedisagreements between themselves. But I think that we can work much more effectively and cooperatively,and maintain that core trust that we have towards each other.
Nowhere have we seen more suspicion than around questions of war and peace and how we respond toterrorism. When 9/11 happened, Europe responded as a true friend would respond to the United States,saying, "We are all Americans."

All of us have a stake in ensuring that innocent people who were just going about their business, going towork, suddenly find themselves slaughtered -- all of us have an interest in preventing that kind of vicious,evil act.
But after the initial NATO engagement in Afghanistan, we got sidetracked by Iraq, and we have not fullyrecovered that initial insight that we have a mutual interest in ensuring that organizations like al Qaedacannot operate. And I think that it is important for Europe to understand that even though I'm now Presidentand George Bush is no longer President, al Qaeda is still a threat, and that we cannot pretend somehowthat because Barack Hussein Obama got elected as President, suddenly everything is going to be okay.
It is going to be a very difficult challenge. Al Qaeda is still bent on carrying out terrorist activity. It is -- don'tfool yourselves -- because some people say, well, you know, if we changed our policies with respect to theIsraeli-Palestinian conflict, or if we were more respectful towards the Muslim world, suddenly theseorganizations would stop threatening us. That's just not the case.
It is true that we have to change our behavior in showing the Muslim world greater respect, and changingour language and changing our tone. It is true that we have to work very hard for Israeli-Palestinian peace.But what is also true is that these organizations are willing to kill innocent people because of a twisted,distorted ideology. And we, as democracies and as people who value human life, can't allow thoseorganizations to operate.
So here's the bottom line. The United States has reviewed and redesigned its approach to Afghanistan. Webelieve that we cannot just win militarily. We have to win through development aid. We have to win throughincreasing the capacity of the Afghan government to provide basic services to its people and to uphold ruleof law. We have to work with the Pakistani government so that they are more trusted by their population andhave more control so that they can then go -- help us go after these terrorists. We have to encouragediplomacy in the region.
So it can't just be a military strategy and we will be in partnership with Europe on the development side andon the diplomatic side. But there will be a military component to it, and Europe should not simply expect theUnited States to shoulder that burden alone. We should not because this is a joint problem and it requiresjoint effort.
One last point I will make. In dealing with terrorism, we can't lose sight of our values and who we are. That'swhy I closed Guantanamo. That's why I made very clear that we will not engage in certain interrogationpractices. I don't believe that there is a contradiction between our security and our values. And when youstart sacrificing your values, when you lose yourself, then over the long term that will make you less secure.When we saw what happened in Abu Ghraib, that wasn't good for our security -- that was a recruitment toolfor terrorism. Humiliating people is never a good strategy to battle terrorism.
So we are going to conduct our operations in a way that reflect our best selves and make sure that we areproud. And that, in turn, will allow the Europeans, I think, to feel good about our joint efforts, and also not tohave excuses not to participate in those joint efforts. All right?

Okay, last question. All right, let me see here. All right, that young lady in the red right there, right there. Shehad all her friends helping her out.
Q Thank you. Hi, I'm Enis Otto [phonetic] from Heidelberg. And I'm totally European. And first of all, I wantedto tell you that your name in Hungarian means "peach."
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Peach?
Q Yes.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Oh, okay. Well, how about that. I did not know that.
Q Yes, now you know it. And we wanted to know if you -- did you ever regret to have run for presidency tillnow? I mean, well, did you ever ask yourself, am I sure to manage -- yes.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Yes, it's a good question. Michelle definitely asked that question. You know, thereare -- there have been times, certainly, during the campaign, and there have been times over the lastseveral months where you feel a lot of weight on your shoulders. There's no doubt about it.
During the campaign, the biggest sacrifice -- the thing that was most difficult was that I was away from myfamily all the time. In addition to missing -- in addition to being jealous about high-speed rail and the nicetrains here, I'm also jealous of the fact that campaigns here only last a few months, whereas in the UnitedStates we were running for two years. So I was away from home all the time, and that was very difficultbecause not only do I have a wonderful wife, but I have two perfect daughters. And so, you know, I missedthem a lot.
But the nice thing is now that I'm President, it turns out I have this really nice office in my house called theOval Office, and so it only takes me a few seconds to get upstairs, and I'm home for dinner every night.
You also lose privacy and autonomy -- or anonymity. You know, it's very frustrating now -- it used to bewhen I came to Europe, that I could just wander down to a café and sit and have some wine and watchpeople go by, and go into a little shop, and watch the sun go down. Now I'm in hotel rooms all the time and Ihave security around me all the time. And so just -- you know, losing that ability to just take a walk, that issomething that is frustrating.
But having said all that, I truly believe that there's nothing more noble than public service. Now, that doesn'tmean that you have to run for President. You know, you might work for Doctors Without Borders, or youmight volunteer for an -- or you might be somebody working for the United Nations, or you might be themayor of Strasbourg. Right? I mean, they're all -- you might volunteer in your own community.
But the point is that what I found at a very young age was that if you only think about yourself -- how muchmoney can I make, what can I buy, how nice is my house, what kind of fancy car do I have -- that over thelong term I think you get bored. I think your life becomes -- I think if you're only thinking about yourself, yourlife becomes diminished; and that the way to live a full life is to think about, what can I do for others? Howcan I be a part of this larger project of making a better world?

Now, that could be something as simple as making -- as the joy of taking care of your family and watchingyour children grow and succeed. But I think especially for the young people here, I hope you also considerother ways that you can serve, because the world has so many challenges right now, there's so manyopportunities to make a difference, and it would be a tragedy if all of you who are so talented and energetic,if you let that go to waste; if you just stood back and watched the world pass you by.
Better to jump in, get involved. And it does mean that sometimes you'll get criticized and sometimes you'llfail and sometimes you'll be disappointed, but you'll have a great adventure, and at the end of your lifehopefully you'll be able to look back and say, I made a difference.
All right. Thank you, everybody.