Good morning, everybody.  Please be seated.  Thank you all for being here.  Let me just acknowledge thepresence of some of my outstanding Cabinet members and advisors.  We've got our Secretary of State,Hillary Clinton.  We have our CIA Director Leon Panetta.  We have our Secretary of Defense William Gates;Secretary Napolitano of Department of Homeland Security; Attorney General Eric Holder; my NationalSecurity Advisor Jim Jones.  And I want to especially thank our Acting Archivist of the United States,Adrienne Thomas.
I also want to acknowledge several members of the House who have great interest in intelligence matters.  Iwant to thank Congressman Reyes, Congressman Hoekstra, Congressman King, as well as CongressmanThompson, for being here today.  Thank you so much.
These are extraordinary times for our country.  We're confronting a historic economic crisis.  We're fightingtwo wars.  We face a range of challenges that will define the way that Americans will live in the 21stcentury.  So there's no shortage of work to be done, or responsibilities to bear.
And we've begun to make progress.  Just this week, we've taken steps to protect American consumers andhomeowners, and to reform our system of government contracting so that we better protect our people whilespending our money more wisely.  The -- it's a good bill.  The engines of our economy are slowly beginningto turn, and we're working towards historic reform on health care and on energy.  I want to say to themembers of Congress, I welcome all the extraordinary work that has been done over these last four monthson these and other issues.
In the midst of all these challenges, however, my single most important responsibility as President is to keepthe American people safe.  It's the first thing that I think about when I wake up in the morning.  It's the lastthing that I think about when I go to sleep at night.

And this responsibility is only magnified in an era when an extremist ideology threatens our people, andtechnology gives a handful of terrorists the potential to do us great harm.  We are less than eight yearsremoved from the deadliest attack on American soil in our history.  We know that al Qaeda is activelyplanning to attack us again.  We know that this threat will be with us for a long time, and that we must use allelements of our power to defeat it.
Already, we've taken several steps to achieve that goal.  For the first time since 2002, we're providing thenecessary resources and strategic direction to take the fight to the extremists who attacked us on 9/11 inAfghanistan and Pakistan.  We're investing in the 21st century military and intelligence capabilities that willallow us to stay one step ahead of a nimble enemy.  We have re-energized a global non-proliferation regimeto deny the world's most dangerous people access to the world's deadliest weapons.  And we've launchedan effort to secure all loose nuclear materials within four years.  We're better protecting our border, andincreasing our preparedness for any future attack or natural disaster.  We're building new partnershipsaround the world to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al Qaeda and its affiliates.  And we have renewedAmerican diplomacy so that we once again have the strength and standing to truly lead the world.
These steps are all critical to keeping America secure.  But I believe with every fiber of my being that in thelong run we also cannot keep this country safe unless we enlist the power of our most fundamental values. The documents that we hold in this very hall -- the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, the Bill ofRights -- these are not simply words written into aging parchment.  They are the foundation of liberty andjustice in this country, and a light that shines for all who seek freedom, fairness, equality, and dignity aroundthe world.
I stand here today as someone whose own life was made possible by these documents.  My father came tothese shores in search of the promise that they offered.  My mother made me rise before dawn to learn theirtruths when I lived as a child in a foreign land.  My own American journey was paved by generations ofcitizens who gave meaning to those simple words -- "to form a more perfect union."  I've studied theConstitution as a student, I've taught it as a teacher, I've been bound by it as a lawyer and a legislator.  Itook an oath to preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief, and as a citizen, Iknow that we must never, ever, turn our back on its enduring principles for expedience sake.
I make this claim not simply as a matter of idealism.  We uphold our most cherished values not onlybecause doing so is right, but because it strengthens our country and it keeps us safe.  Time and again, ourvalues have been our best national security asset -- in war and peace; in times of ease and in eras ofupheaval.
Fidelity to our values is the reason why the United States of America grew from a small string of coloniesunder the writ of an empire to the strongest nation in the world.
It's the reason why enemy soldiers have surrendered to us in battle, knowing they'd receive better treatmentfrom America's Armed Forces than from their own government.
It's the reason why America has benefitted from strong alliances that amplified our power, and drawn asharp, moral contrast with our adversaries.

It's the reason why we've been able to overpower the iron fist of fascism and outlast the iron curtain ofcommunism, and enlist free nations and free peoples everywhere in the common cause and common effortof liberty.
From Europe to the Pacific, we've been the nation that has shut down torture chambers and replacedtyranny with the rule of law.  That is who we are.  And where terrorists offer only the injustice of disorder anddestruction, America must demonstrate that our values and our institutions are more resilient than a hatefulideology.
After 9/11, we knew that we had entered a new era -- that enemies who did not abide by any law of warwould present new challenges to our application of the law; that our government would need new tools toprotect the American people, and that these tools would have to allow us to prevent attacks instead ofsimply prosecuting those who try to carry them out.
Unfortunately, faced with an uncertain threat, our government made a series of hasty decisions.  I believethat many of these decisions were motivated by a sincere desire to protect the American people.  But I alsobelieve that all too often our government made decisions based on fear rather than foresight; that all toooften our government trimmed facts and evidence to fit ideological predispositions.  Instead of strategicallyapplying our power and our principles, too often we set those principles aside as luxuries that we could nolonger afford.  And during this season of fear, too many of us -- Democrats and Republicans, politicians,journalists, and citizens -- fell silent.
In other words, we went off course.  And this is not my assessment alone.  It was an assessment that wasshared by the American people who nominated candidates for President from both major parties who,despite our many differences, called for a new approach -- one that rejected torture and one that recognizedthe imperative of closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay.
Now let me be clear:  We are indeed at war with al Qaeda and its affiliates.  We do need to update ourinstitutions to deal with this threat.  But we must do so with an abiding confidence in the rule of law and dueprocess; in checks and balances and accountability.  For reasons that I will explain, the decisions that weremade over the last eight years established an ad hoc legal approach for fighting terrorism that was neithereffective nor sustainable -- a framework that failed to rely on our legal traditions and time-tested institutions,and that failed to use our values as a compass.  And that's why I took several steps upon taking office tobetter protect the American people.
First, I banned the use of so-called enhanced interrogation techniques by the United States of America.
I know some have argued that brutal methods like waterboarding were necessary to keep us safe.  I couldnot disagree more.  As Commander-in-Chief, I see the intelligence.  I bear the responsibility for keeping thiscountry safe.  And I categorically reject the assertion that these are the most effective means ofinterrogation.  What's more, they undermine the rule of law.  They alienate us in the world.  They serve as arecruitment tool for terrorists, and increase the will of our enemies to fight us, while decreasing the will ofothers to work with America.

They risk the lives of our troops by making it less likely that others will surrender to them in battle, and morelikely that Americans will be mistreated if they are captured.  In short, they did not advance our war andcounterterrorism efforts -- they undermined them, and that is why I ended them once and for all.
Now, I should add, the arguments against these techniques did not originate from my administration.  AsSenator McCain once said, torture "serves as a great propaganda tool for those who recruit people to fightagainst us."  And even under President Bush, there was recognition among members of his ownadministration -- including a Secretary of State, other senior officials, and many in the military andintelligence community -- that those who argued for these tactics were on the wrong side of the debate, andthe wrong side of history.  That's why we must leave these methods where they belong -- in the past.  Theyare not who we are, and they are not America.
The second decision that I made was to order the closing of the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay.
For over seven years, we have detained hundreds of people at Guantanamo.  During that time, the systemof military commissions that were in place at Guantanamo succeeded in convicting a grand total of threesuspected terrorists.  Let me repeat that:  three convictions in over seven years.  Instead of bringingterrorists to justice, efforts at prosecution met setback after setback, cases lingered on, and in 2006 theSupreme Court invalidated the entire system.  Meanwhile, over 525 detainees were released fromGuantanamo under not my administration, under the previous administration.  Let me repeat that:  Two-
thirds of the detainees were released before I took office and ordered the closure of Guantanamo.
There is also no question that Guantanamo set back the moral authority that is America's strongest currencyin the world.  Instead of building a durable framework for the struggle against al Qaeda that drew upon ourdeeply held values and traditions, our government was defending positions that undermined the rule of law. In fact, part of the rationale for establishing Guantanamo in the first place was the misplaced notion that aprison there would be beyond the law -- a proposition that the Supreme Court soundly rejected.  Meanwhile,instead of serving as a tool to counter terrorism, Guantanamo became a symbol that helped al Qaedarecruit terrorists to its cause.  Indeed, the existence of Guantanamo likely created more terrorists around theworld than it ever detained.
So the record is clear:  Rather than keeping us safer, the prison at Guantanamo has weakened Americannational security.  It is a rallying cry for our enemies.  It sets back the willingness of our allies to work with usin fighting an enemy that operates in scores of countries.  By any measure, the costs of keeping it open farexceed the complications involved in closing it.  That's why I argued that it should be closed throughout mycampaign, and that is why I ordered it closed within one year.
The third decision that I made was to order a review of all pending cases at Guantanamo.  I knew when Iordered Guantanamo closed that it would be difficult and complex.  There are 240 people there who havenow spent years in legal limbo.  In dealing with this situation, we don't have the luxury of starting fromscratch.  We're cleaning up something that is, quite simply, a mess -- a misguided experiment that has left inits wake a flood of legal challenges that my administration is forced to deal with on a constant, almost dailybasis, and it consumes the time of government officials whose time should be spent on better protecting ourcountry.

Indeed, the legal challenges that have sparked so much debate in recent weeks here in Washington wouldbe taking place whether or not I decided to close Guantanamo.  For example, the court order to release 17Uighurs -- 17 Uighur detainees took place last fall, when George Bush was President.  The Supreme Courtthat invalidated the system of prosecution at Guantanamo in 2006 was overwhelmingly appointed byRepublican Presidents -- not wild-eyed liberals.  In other words, the problem of what to do with Guantanamodetainees was not caused by my decision to close the facility; the problem exists because of the decision toopen Guantanamo in the first place. 
Now let me be blunt.  There are no neat or easy answers here.  I wish there were.  But I can tell you that thewrong answer is to pretend like this problem will go away if we maintain an unsustainable status quo.  AsPresident, I refuse to allow this problem to fester.  I refuse to pass it on to somebody else.  It is myresponsibility to solve the problem.  Our security interests will not permit us to delay.  Our courts won't allowit.  And neither should our conscience.
Now, over the last several weeks, we've seen a return of the politicization of these issues that havecharacterized the last several years.  I'm an elected official; I understand these problems arouse passionsand concerns.  They should.  We're confronting some of the most complicated questions that a democracycan face.  But I have no interest in spending all of our time relitigating the policies of the last eight years.  I'llleave that to others.  I want to solve these problems, and I want to solve them together as Americans.
And we will be ill-served by some of the fear-mongering that emerges whenever we discuss this issue. Listening to the recent debate, I've heard words that, frankly, are calculated to scare people rather thaneducate them; words that have more to do with politics than protecting our country.  So I want to take thisopportunity to lay out what we are doing, and how we intend to resolve these outstanding issues.  I willexplain how each action that we are taking will help build a framework that protects both the Americanpeople and the values that we hold most dear.  And I'll focus on two broad areas:  first, issues relating toGuantanamo and our detention policy; but, second, I also want to discuss issues relating to security andtransparency.
Now, let me begin by disposing of one argument as plainly as I can:  We are not going to release anyone if itwould endanger our national security, nor will we release detainees within the United States who endangerthe American people.  Where demanded by justice and national security, we will seek to transfer somedetainees to the same type of facilities in which we hold all manner of dangerous and violent criminals withinour borders -- namely, highly secure prisons that ensure the public safety. 
As we make these decisions, bear in mind the following face:  Nobody has ever escaped from one of ourfederal, supermax prisons, which hold hundreds of convicted terrorists.  As Republican Lindsey Grahamsaid, the idea that we cannot find a place to securely house 250-plus detainees within the United States isnot rational.
We are currently in the process of reviewing each of the detainee cases at Guantanamo to determine theappropriate policy for dealing with them.  And as we do so, we are acutely aware that under the lastadministration, detainees were released and, in some cases, returned to the battlefield.  That's why we aredoing away with the poorly planned, haphazard approach that let those detainees go in the past.  Insteadwe are treating these cases with the care and attention that the law requires and that our security demands.

Now, going forward, these cases will fall into five distinct categories.
First, whenever feasible, we will try those who have violated American criminal laws in federal courts --courts provided for by the United States Constitution.  Some have derided our federal courts as incapable ofhandling the trials of terrorists.  They are wrong.  Our courts and our juries, our citizens, are tough enough toconvict terrorists.  The record makes that clear.  Ramzi Yousef tried to blow up the World Trade Center.  Hewas convicted in our courts and is serving a life sentence in U.S. prisons.  Zacarias Moussaoui has beenidentified as the 20th 9/11 hijacker.  He was convicted in our courts, and he too is serving a life sentence inprison.  If we can try those terrorists in our courts and hold them in our prisons, then we can do the samewith detainees from Guantanamo.
Recently, we prosecuted and received a guilty plea from a detainee, al-Marri, in federal court after years oflegal confusion.  We're preparing to transfer another detainee to the Southern District Court of New York,where he will face trial on charges related to the 1998 bombings of our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania --bombings that killed over 200 people.  Preventing this detainee from coming to our shores would prevent histrial and conviction.  And after over a decade, it is time to finally see that justice is served, and that is whatwe intend to do.
The second category of cases involves detainees who violate the laws of war and are therefore best triedthrough military commissions.  Military commissions have a history in the United States dating back toGeorge Washington and the Revolutionary War.  They are an appropriate venue for trying detainees forviolations of the laws of war.  They allow for the protection of sensitive sources and methods of intelligence-
gathering; they allow for the safety and security of participants; and for the presentation of evidencegathered from the battlefield that cannot always be effectively presented in federal courts.
Now, some have suggested that this represents a reversal on my part.  They should look at the record.  In2006, I did strongly oppose legislation proposed by the Bush administration and passed by the Congressbecause it failed to establish a legitimate legal framework, with the kind of meaningful due process rights forthe accused that could stand up on appeal.
I said at that time, however, that I supported the use of military commissions to try detainees, provided therewere several reforms, and in fact there were some bipartisan efforts to achieve those reforms.  Those arethe reforms that we are now making.  Instead of using the flawed commissions of the last seven years, myadministration is bringing our commissions in line with the rule of law.  We will no longer permit the use ofevidence -- as evidence statements that have been obtained using cruel, inhuman, or degradinginterrogation methods.  We will no longer place the burden to prove that hearsay is unreliable on theopponent of the hearsay.  And we will give detainees greater latitude in selecting their own counsel, andmore protections if they refuse to testify.  These reforms, among others, will make our military commissionsa more credible and effective means of administering justice, and I will work with Congress and members ofboth parties, as well as legal authorities across the political spectrum, on legislation to ensure that thesecommissions are fair, legitimate, and effective.
The third category of detainees includes those who have been ordered released by the courts.  Now, let merepeat what I said earlier:  This has nothing to do with my decision to close Guantanamo.  It has to do withthe rule of law.

The courts have spoken.  They have found that there's no legitimate reason to hold 21 of the peoplecurrently held at Guantanamo.  Nineteen of these findings took place before I was sworn into office.  Icannot ignore these rulings because as President, I too am bound by the law.  The United States is a nationof laws and so we must abide by these rulings.
The fourth category of cases involves detainees who we have determined can be transferred safely toanother country.  So far, our review team has approved 50 detainees for transfer.  And my administration isin ongoing discussions with a number of other countries about the transfer of detainees to their soil fordetention and rehabilitation.
Now, finally, there remains the question of detainees at Guantanamo who cannot be prosecuted yet whopose a clear danger to the American people.  And I have to be honest here -- this is the toughest singleissue that we will face.  We're going to exhaust every avenue that we have to prosecute those atGuantanamo who pose a danger to our country.  But even when this process is complete, there may be anumber of people who cannot be prosecuted for past crimes, in some cases because evidence may betainted, but who nonetheless pose a threat to the security of the United States.  Examples of that threatinclude people who've received extensive explosives training at al Qaeda training camps, or commandedTaliban troops in battle, or expressed their allegiance to Osama bin Laden, or otherwise made it clear thatthey want to kill Americans.  These are people who, in effect, remain at war with the United States.
Let me repeat:  I am not going to release individuals who endanger the American people.  Al Qaedaterrorists and their affiliates are at war with the United States, and those that we capture -- like otherprisoners of war -- must be prevented from attacking us again.  Having said that, we must recognize thatthese detention policies cannot be unbounded.  They can't be based simply on what I or the executivebranch decide alone.  That's why my administration has begun to reshape the standards that apply toensure that they are in line with the rule of law. We must have clear, defensible, and lawful standards forthose who fall into this category.  We must have fair procedures so that we don't make mistakes.  We musthave a thorough process of periodic review, so that any prolonged detention is carefully evaluated andjustified.
I know that creating such a system poses unique challenges. And other countries have grappled with thisquestion; now, so must we.  But I want to be very clear that our goal is to construct a legitimate legalframework for the remaining Guantanamo detainees that cannot be transferred.  Our goal is not to avoid alegitimate legal framework.  In our constitutional system, prolonged detention should not be the decision ofany one man.  If and when we determine that the United States must hold individuals to keep them fromcarrying out an act of war, we will do so within a system that involves judicial and congressional oversight. And so, going forward, my administration will work with Congress to develop an appropriate legal regime sothat our efforts are consistent with our values and our Constitution.
Now, as our efforts to close Guantanamo move forward, I know that the politics in Congress will be difficult. These are issues that are fodder for 30-second commercials.  You can almost picture the direct mail piecesthat emerge from any vote on this issue -- designed to frighten the population.  I get it.  But if we continue tomake decisions within a climate of fear, we will make more mistakes.  And if we refuse to deal with theseissues today, then I guarantee you that they will be an albatross around our efforts to combat terrorism inthe future.

I have confidence that the American people are more interested in doing what is right to protect this countrythan in political posturing.  I am not the only person in this city who swore an oath to uphold the Constitution-- so did each and every member of Congress.  And together we have a responsibility to enlist our values inthe effort to secure our people, and to leave behind the legacy that makes it easier for future Presidents tokeep this country safe.
Now, let me touch on a second set of issues that relate to security and transparency. 
National security requires a delicate balance.  One the one hand, our democracy depends on transparency. On the other hand, some information must be protected from public disclosure for the sake of our security --for instance, the movement of our troops, our intelligence-gathering, or the information we have about aterrorist organization and its affiliates.  In these and other cases, lives are at stake.
Now, several weeks ago, as part of an ongoing court case, I released memos issued by the previousadministration's Office of Legal Counsel.  I did not do this because I disagreed with the enhancedinterrogation techniques that those memos authorized, and I didn't release the documents because Irejected their legal rationales -- although I do on both counts.  I released the memos because the existenceof that approach to interrogation was already widely known, the Bush administration had acknowledged itsexistence, and I had already banned those methods.  The argument that somehow by releasing thosememos we are providing terrorists with information about how they will be interrogated makes no sense. We will not be interrogating terrorists using that approach.  That approach is now prohibited.
In short, I released these memos because there was no overriding reason to protect them.  And the ensuingdebate has helped the American people better understand how these interrogation methods came to beauthorized and used.
On the other hand, I recently opposed the release of certain photographs that were taken of detainees byU.S. personnel between 2002 and 2004.  Individuals who violated standards of behavior in these photoshave been investigated and they have been held accountable.  There was and is no debate as to whetherwhat is reflected in those photos is wrong.  Nothing has been concealed to absolve perpetrators of crimes. However, it was my judgment -- informed by my national security team -- that releasing these photos wouldinflame anti-American opinion and allow our enemies to paint U.S. troops with a broad, damning, andinaccurate brush, thereby endangering them in theaters of war.
In short, there is a clear and compelling reason to not release these particular photos.  There are nearly200,000 Americans who are serving in harm's way, and I have a solemn responsibility for their safety asCommander-in-Chief.  Nothing would be gained by the release of these photos that matters more than thelives of our young men and women serving in harm's way.
Now, in the press's mind and in some of the public's mind, these two cases are contradictory.  They are notto me.  In each of these cases, I had to strike the right balance between transparency and national security. And this balance brings with it a precious responsibility.  There's no doubt that the American people haveseen this balance tested over the last several years.  In the images from Abu Ghraib and the brutalinterrogation techniques made public long before I was President, the American people learned of actionstaken in their name that bear no resemblance to the ideals that generations of Americans have fought for.

And whether it was the run-up to the Iraq war or the revelation of secret programs, Americans often felt likepart of the story had been unnecessarily withheld from them.  And that caused suspicion to build up.  Andthat leads to a thirst for accountability.
I understand that.  I ran for President promising transparency, and I meant what I said.  And that's why,whenever possible, my administration will make all information available to the American people so that theycan make informed judgments and hold us accountable.  But I have never argued -- and I never will -- thatour most sensitive national security matters should simply be an open book.  I will never abandon -- and willvigorously defend -- the necessity of classification to defend our troops at war, to protect sources andmethods, and to safeguard confidential actions that keep the American people safe.  Here's the differencethough:  Whenever we cannot release certain information to the public for valid national security reasons, Iwill insist that there is oversight of my actions -- by Congress or by the courts.
We're currently launching a review of current policies by all those agencies responsible for the classificationof documents to determine where reforms are possible, and to assure that the other branches ofgovernment will be in a position to review executive branch decisions on these matters.  Because in oursystem of checks and balances, someone must always watch over the watchers -- especially when it comesto sensitive administration -- information.
Now, along these same lines, my administration is also confronting challenges to what is known as the"state secrets" privilege.  This is a doctrine that allows the government to challenge legal cases involvingsecret programs.  It's been used by many past Presidents -- Republican and Democrat -- for manydecades.  And while this principle is absolutely necessary in some circumstances to protect nationalsecurity, I am concerned that it has been over-used.  It is also currently the subject of a wide range oflawsuits.  So let me lay out some principles here.  We must not protect information merely because itreveals the violation of a law or embarrassment to the government.  And that's why my administration isnearing completion of a thorough review of this practice.
And we plan to embrace several principles for reform.  We will apply a stricter legal test to material that canbe protected under the state secrets privilege.  We will not assert the privilege in court without first followingour own formal process, including review by a Justice Department committee and the personal approval ofthe Attorney General.  And each year we will voluntarily report to Congress when we have invoked theprivilege and why because, as I said before, there must be proper oversight over our actions.
On all these matters related to the disclosure of sensitive information, I wish I could say that there was somesimple formula out there to be had.  There is not.  These often involve tough calls, involve competingconcerns, and they require a surgical approach.  But the common thread that runs through all of mydecisions is simple:  We will safeguard what we must to protect the American people, but we will alsoensure the accountability and oversight that is the hallmark of our constitutional system.  I will never hide thetruth because it's uncomfortable.  I will deal with Congress and the courts as co-equal branches ofgovernment.  I will tell the American people what I know and don't know, and when I release somethingpublicly or keep something secret, I will tell you why.
Now, in all the areas that I've discussed today, the policies that I've proposed represent a new direction fromthe last eight years.  To protect the American people and our values, we've banned enhanced interrogationtechniques.
We are closing the prison at Guantanamo.  We are reforming military commissions, and we will pursue anew legal regime to detain terrorists.  We are declassifying more information and embracing more oversightof our actions, and we're narrowing our use of the state secrets privilege.  These are dramatic changes thatwill put our approach to national security on a surer, safer, and more sustainable footing.  Theirimplementation will take time, but they will get done.
There's a core principle that we will apply to all of our actions.  Even as we clean up the mess atGuantanamo, we will constantly reevaluate our approach, subject our decisions to review from otherbranches of government, as well as the public.  We seek the strongest and most sustainable legalframework for addressing these issues in the long term -- not to serve immediate politics, but to do what'sright over the long term.  By doing that we can leave behind a legacy that outlasts my administration, mypresidency, that endures for the next President and the President after that -- a legacy that protects theAmerican people and enjoys a broad legitimacy at home and abroad.
Now, this is what I mean when I say that we need to focus on the future.  I recognize that many still have astrong desire to focus on the past.  When it comes to actions of the last eight years, passions are high. Some Americans are angry; others want to re-fight debates that have been settled, in some cases debatesthat they have lost.  I know that these debates lead directly, in some cases, to a call for a fuller accounting,perhaps through an independent commission.
I've opposed the creation of such a commission because I believe that our existing democratic institutionsare strong enough to deliver accountability.  The Congress can review abuses of our values, and there areongoing inquiries by the Congress into matters like enhanced interrogation techniques.  The Department ofJustice and our courts can work through and punish any violations of our laws or miscarriages of justice.
It's no secret there is a tendency in Washington to spend our time pointing fingers at one another.  And it'sno secret that our media culture feeds the impulse that lead to a good fight and good copy.  But nothing willcontribute more than that than a extended relitigation of the last eight years.  Already, we've seen how thatkind of effort only leads those in Washington to different sides to laying blame.  It can distract us fromfocusing our time, our efforts, and our politics on the challenges of the future.
We see that, above all, in the recent debate -- how the recent debate has obscured the truth and sendspeople into opposite and absolutist ends.  On the one side of the spectrum, there are those who make littleallowance for the unique challenges posed by terrorism, and would almost never put national security overtransparency.  And on the other end of the spectrum, there are those who embrace a view that can besummarized in two words:  "Anything goes."  Their arguments suggest that the ends of fighting terrorism canbe used to justify any means, and that the President should have blanket authority to do whatever he wants-- provided it is a President with whom they agree.
Both sides may be sincere in their views, but neither side is right.  The American people are not absolutist,and they don't elect us to impose a rigid ideology on our problems.  They know that we need not sacrificeour security for our values, nor sacrifice our values for our security, so long as we approach difficultquestions with honesty and care and a dose of common sense.  That, after all, is the unique genius ofAmerica.  That's the challenge laid down by our Constitution.  That has been the source of our strengththrough the ages.  That's what makes the United States of America different as a nation.

I can stand here today, as President of the United States, and say without exception or equivocation that wedo not torture, and that we will vigorously protect our people while forging a strong and durable frameworkthat allows us to fight terrorism while abiding by the rule of law.  Make no mistake:  If we fail to turn the pageon the approach that was taken over the past several years, then I will not be able to say that as President. And if we cannot stand for our core values, then we are not keeping faith with the documents that areenshrined in this hall.
The Framers who drafted the Constitution could not have foreseen the challenges that have unfolded overthe last 222 years.  But our Constitution has endured through secession and civil rights, through World Warand Cold War, because it provides a foundation of principles that can be applied pragmatically; it provides acompass that can help us find our way.  It hasn't always been easy.  We are an imperfect people.  Everynow and then, there are those who think that America's safety and success requires us to walk away fromthe sacred principles enshrined in this building.  And we hear such voices today.  But over the long haul theAmerican people have resisted that temptation.  And though we've made our share of mistakes, requiredsome course corrections, ultimately we have held fast to the principles that have been the source of ourstrength and a beacon to the world.
Now this generation faces a great test in the specter of terrorism.  And unlike the Civil War or World War II,we can't count on a surrender ceremony to bring this journey to an end.  Right now, in distant trainingcamps and in crowded cities, there are people plotting to take American lives.  That will be the case a yearfrom now, five years from now, and -- in all probability -- 10 years from now.  Neither I nor anyone can standhere today and say that there will not be another terrorist attack that takes American lives.  But I can saywith certainty that my administration -- along with our extraordinary troops and the patriotic men and womenwho defend our national security -- will do everything in our power to keep the American people safe.  And Ido know with certainty that we can defeat al Qaeda.  Because the terrorists can only succeed if they swelltheir ranks and alienate America from our allies, and they will never be able to do that if we stay true to whowe are, if we forge tough and durable approaches to fighting terrorism that are anchored in our timelessideals.  This must be our common purpose.
I ran for President because I believe that we cannot solve the challenges of our time unless we solve themtogether.  We will not be safe if we see national security as a wedge that divides America -- it can and mustbe a cause that unites us as one people and as one nation.  We've done so before in times that were moreperilous than ours.  We will do so once again.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.