There’s been another mass shooting in America -- this time, in a community college inOregon.
That means there are more American families -- moms, dads, children -- whose lives havebeen changed forever.  That means there’s another community stunned with grief, andcommunities across the country forced to relieve their own anguish, and parents across thecountry who are scared because they know it might have been their families or their children.
I’ve been to Roseburg, Oregon.  There are really good people there.  I want to thank all thefirst responders whose bravery likely saved some lives today.  Federal law enforcement hasbeen on the scene in a supporting role, and we’ve offered to stay and help as much asRoseburg needs, for as long as they need.
In the coming days, we’ll learn about the victims -- young men and women who werestudying and learning and working hard, their eyes set on the future, their dreams on whatthey could make of their lives.  And America will wrap everyone who’s grieving with ourprayers and our love.  
  
But as I said just a few months ago, and I said a few months before that, and I said each timewe see one of these mass shootings, our thoughts and prayers are not enough.  It’s notenough.  It does not capture the heartache and grief and anger that we should feel.  And itdoes nothing to prevent this carnage from being inflicted someplace else in America -- nextweek, or a couple of months from now.
We don't yet know why this individual did what he did.  And it's fair to say that anybody whodoes this has a sickness in their minds, regardless of what they think their motivations maybe.  But we are not the only country on Earth that has people with mental illnesses or want todo harm to other people.  We are the only advanced country on Earth that sees these kinds ofmass shootings every few months.  
Earlier this year, I answered a question in an interview by saying, “The United States ofAmerica is the one advanced nation on Earth in which we do not have sufficient common-
sense gun-safety laws -- even in the face of repeated mass killings.”  And later that day, therewas a mass shooting at a movie theater in Lafayette, Louisiana.  That day!  Somehow this hasbecome routine.  The reporting is routine.  My response here at this podium ends up beingroutine.  The conversation in the aftermath of it.  We've become numb to this.
We talked about this after Columbine and Blacksburg, after Tucson, after Newtown, afterAurora, after Charleston.  It cannot be this easy for somebody who wants to inflict harm onother people to get his or her hands on a gun.  
And what’s become routine, of course, is the response of those who oppose any kind ofcommon-sense gun legislation.  Right now, I can imagine the press releases being crankedout:  We need more guns, they’ll argue.  Fewer gun safety laws.  
Does anybody really believe that?  There are scores of responsible gun owners in this country--they know that's not true.  We know because of the polling that says the majority ofAmericans understand we should be changing these laws -- including the majority ofresponsible, law-abiding gun owners.  
There is a gun for roughly every man, woman, and child in America.  So how can you, with astraight face, make the argument that more guns will make us safer?  We know that stateswith the most gun laws tend to have the fewest gun deaths.  So the notion that gun lawsdon't work, or just will make it harder for law-abiding citizens and criminals will still get theirguns is not borne out by the evidence.
We know that other countries, in response to one mass shooting, have been able to craft lawsthat almost eliminate mass shootings.  Friends of ours, allies of ours -- Great Britain,Australia, countries like ours.  So we know there are ways to prevent it.  
  
And, of course, what’s also routine is that somebody, somewhere will comment and say,Obama politicized this issue.  Well, this is something we should politicize.  It is relevant to ourcommon life together, to the body politic.  I would ask news organizations -- because I won'tput these facts forward -- have news organizations tally up the number of Americans who’vebeen killed through terrorist attacks over the last decade and the number of Americanswho’ve been killed by gun violence, and post those side-by-side on your news reports.  Thiswon't be information coming from me; it will be coming from you.  We spend over a trilliondollars, and pass countless laws, and devote entire agencies to preventing terrorist attacks onour soil, and rightfully so.  And yet, we have a Congress that explicitly blocks us from evencollecting data on how we could potentially reduce gun deaths.  How can that be?
This is a political choice that we make to allow this to happen every few months in America. We collectively are answerable to those families who lose their loved ones because of ourinaction.  When Americans are killed in mine disasters, we work to make mines safer.  WhenAmericans are killed in floods and hurricanes, we make communities safer.  When roads areunsafe, we fix them to reduce auto fatalities.  We have seatbelt laws because we know itsaves lives.  So the notion that gun violence is somehow different, that our freedom and ourConstitution prohibits any modest regulation of how we use a deadly weapon, when there arelaw-abiding gun owners all across the country who could hunt and protect their families anddo everything they do under such regulations doesn’t make sense.
So, tonight, as those of us who are lucky enough to hug our kids a little closer are thinkingabout the families who aren't so fortunate, I’d ask the American people to think about howthey can get our government to change these laws, and to save lives, and to let young peoplegrow up.  And that will require a change of politics on this issue.  And it will require that theAmerican people, individually, whether you are a Democrat or a Republican or anindependent, when you decide to vote for somebody, are making a determination as towhether this cause of continuing death for innocent people should be a relevant factor in yourdecision.  If you think this is a problem, then you should expect your elected officials to reflectyour views.
And I would particularly ask America’s gun owners -- who are using those guns properly,safely, to hunt, for sport, for protecting their families -- to think about whether your views areproperly being represented by the organization that suggests it's speaking for you.
And each time this happens I'm going to bring this up.  Each time this happens I am going tosay that we can actually do something about it, but we're going to have to change our laws. And this is not something I can do by myself.  I've got to have a Congress and I've got tohave state legislatures and governors who are willing to work with me on this.  
I hope and pray that I don't have to come out again during my tenure as President to offer mycondolences to families in these circumstances.  But based on my experience as President, Ican't guarantee that.  And that's terrible to say.  And it can change.
  
May God bless the memories of those who were killed today.  May He bring comfort to theirfamilies, and courage to the injured as they fight their way back.  And may He give us thestrength to come together and find the courage to change.
Thank you.
