Good morning. Over the past two days, American pilots and crews have served with courageand skill in the skies over Iraq.
First, American forces have conducted targeted airstrikes against terrorist forces outside thecity of Erbil to prevent them from advancing on the city and to protect our American diplomatsand military personnel. So far, these strikes have successfully destroyed arms and equipmentthat ISIL terrorists could have used against Erbil. Meanwhile, Kurdish forces on the groundcontinue to defend the city, and the United States and the Iraqi government have stepped upour military assistance to Kurdish forces as they wage their fight.
Second, our humanitarian effort continues to help the men, women and children stranded onMount Sinjar.1 American forces have so far conducted two successful airdrops -- deliveringthousands of meals and gallons of water to these desperate men, women and children. AndAmerican aircraft are positioned to strike ISIL terrorists around the mountain to help forces inIraq break the siege and rescue those who are trapped there. 
Now, even as we deal with these immediate situations, we continue to pursue a broaderstrategy in Iraq. We will protect our American citizens in Iraq, whether they’re diplomats,civilians or military. If these terrorists threaten our facilities or our personnel, we will takeaction to protect our people.
We will continue to provide military assistance and advice to the Iraqi government andKurdish forces as they battle these terrorists, so that the terrorists cannot establish apermanent safe haven. 
  
We will continue to work with the international community to deal with the growinghumanitarian crisis in Iraq. Even as our attention is focused on preventing an act of genocideand helping the men and women and children on the mountain, countless Iraqis have beendriven or fled from their homes, including many Christians. 
This morning, I spoke with Prime Minister Cameron of the United Kingdom and PresidentHollande of France. I’m pleased that both leaders expressed their strong support for ouractions and have agreed to join us in providing humanitarian assistance to Iraqi civilians whoare suffering so much. Once again, America is proud to act alongside our closest friends andallies.
More broadly, the United Nations in Iraq is working urgently to help respond to the needs ofthose Iraqis fleeing from areas under threat. The U.N. Security Council has called on theinternational community to do everything it can to provide food, water and shelter. And in mycalls with allies and partners around the world, I’ll continue to urge them to join us in thishumanitarian effort. 
Finally, we continue to call on Iraqis to come together and form the inclusive government thatIraq needs right now. Vice President Biden has been speaking to Iraqi leaders, and our teamin Baghdad is in close touch with the Iraqi government. All Iraqi communities are ultimatelythreatened by these barbaric terrorists and all Iraqi communities need to unite to defend theircountry.
Just as we are focused on the situation in the north affecting Kurds and Iraqi minorities,Sunnis and Shia in different parts of Iraq have suffered mightily at the hands of ISIL. Once aninclusive government is in place, I’m confident it will be easier to mobilize all Iraqis againstISIL, and to mobilize greater support from our friends and allies. Ultimately, only Iraqis canensure the security and stability of Iraq. The United States can’t do it for them, but we canand will be partners in that effort.
One final thing -- as we go forward, we’ll continue to consult with Congress and coordinateclosely with our allies and partners. And as Americans, we will continue to show gratitude toour men and women in uniform who are conducting our operations there. When called, theywere ready -- as they always are. When given their mission, they’ve performed withdistinction -- as they always do. And when we see them serving with such honor andcompassion, defending our fellow citizens and saving the lives of people they’ve never met, itmakes us proud to be Americans -- as we always will be.
So with that, let me take a couple questions. 
Q: Mr. President, for how long a period of time do you see these airstrikes continuing for? Andis your goal there to contain ISIS or to destroy it?
  
THE PRESIDENT: I’m not going to give a particular timetable, because as I’ve said from thestart, wherever and whenever U.S. personnel and facilities are threatened, it’s my obligation,my responsibility as Commander-in-Chief, to make sure that they are protected. And we’renot moving our embassy anytime soon. We’re not moving our consulate anytime soon. Andthat means that, given the challenging security environment, we’re going to maintainvigilance and ensure that our people are safe.
Our initial goal is to not only make sure Americans are protected, but also to deal with thishumanitarian situation in Sinjar. We feel confident that we can prevent ISIL from going up amountain and slaughtering the people who are there. But the next step, which is going to becomplicated logistically, is how do we give safe passage for people down from the mountain,and where can we ultimately relocate them so that they are safe. That’s the kind ofcoordination that we need to do internationally. 
I was very pleased to get the cooperation of both Prime Minister Cameron and PresidentHollande in addressing some of the immediate needs in terms of airdrops and some of theassets and logistical support that they’re providing. But there’s a broader set of questions thatour experts now are engaged in with the United Nations and our allies and partners, and thatis how do we potentially create a safe corridor or some other mechanism so that these peoplecan move. That may take some time -- because there are varying estimates of how manypeople are up there, but they’re in the thousands, and moving them is not simple in this kindof security environment.
Just to give people a sense, though, of a timetable -- that the most important timetable thatI’m focused on right now is the Iraqi government getting formed and finalized. Because in theabsence of an Iraqi government, it is very hard to get a unified effort by Iraqis against ISIL.We can conduct airstrikes, but ultimately there’s not going to be an American military solutionto this problem. There’s going to have to be an Iraqi solution that America and other countriesand allies support. And that can’t happen effectively until you have a legitimate Iraqigovernment.
So right now we have a president, we have a speaker. What we don’t yet have is a primeminister and a cabinet that is formed that can go ahead and move forward, and then startreaching out to all the various groups and factions inside of Iraq, and can give confidence topopulations in the Sunni areas that ISIL is not the only game in town. It also then allows us totake those Iraqi security forces that are able and functional, and they understand who they’rereporting to and what they’re fighting for, and what the chain of command is. And it providesa structure in which better cooperation is taking place between the Kurdish region andBaghdad.
So we’re going to be pushing very hard to encourage Iraqis to get their government together.Until we do that, it is going to be hard to get the unity of effort that allows us to not just playdefense, but also engage in some offense.
  
Q: Mr. President, the United States has fought long wars in Afghanistan and Iraq withuncertain outcomes. How do you assure the American people that we’re not getting draggedinto another war in Iraq? Have you underestimated the power of ISIS? And finally, you saidthat you involved international partners in humanitarian efforts. Is there any thought totalking to international partners as far as military actions to prevent the spread of ISIS?
THE PRESIDENT: Well, a couple of things I would say. Number one, I’ve been very clear thatwe’re not going to have U.S. combat troops in Iraq again. And we are going to maintain that,because we should have learned a lesson from our long and immensely costly incursion inIraq. And that is that our military is so effective that we can keep a lid on problems whereverwe are, if we put enough personnel and resources into it. But it can only last if the people inthese countries themselves are able to arrive at the kinds of political accommodations andcompromise that any civilized society requires. 
And so it would be, I think, a big mistake for us to think that we can, on the cheap, simply goin, tamp everything down again, restart without some fundamental shift in attitudes amongthe various Iraqi factions. That’s why it is so important to have an Iraqi government on theground that is taking responsibility that we can help, that we can partner with, that has thecapacity to get alliances in the region. And once that’s in place, then I think we end up beingone of many countries that can work together to deal with the broader crisis that ISIL poses.
What were your other questions? Did we underestimate ISIL? I think that there is no doubtthat their advance, their movement over the last several months has been more rapid thanthe intelligence estimates and I think the expectations of policymakers both in and outside ofIraq. And part of that is I think not a full appreciation of the degree to which the Iraqi securityforces, when they’re far away from Baghdad, did not have the incentive or the capacity tohold ground against an aggressive adversary. And so that’s one more reason why Iraqigovernment formation is so important -- because there has to be a rebuilding and anunderstanding of who it is that the Iraqi security forces are reporting to, what they arefighting for. And there has to be some investment by Sunnis in pushing back against ISIL. 
I think we’re already seeing -- and we will see even further -- the degree to which thoseterritories under ISIL control alienated populations, because of the barbarity and brutality withwhich they operate. But in order to ensure that Sunni populations reject outright these kindsof incursions, they’ve got to feel like they’re invested in a broader national government. Andright now, they don’t feel that. 
So the upshot is that what we’ve seen over the last several months indicates the weaknessesin an Iraqi government. But what we’ve also seen I think is a wake-up call for a lot of Iraqisinside of Baghdad recognizing that we’re going to have to rethink how we do business if we’regoing to hold our country together. And, hopefully, that change in attitude supplemented byimproved security efforts in which we can assist and help, that can make a difference. 
  
Q: You just expressed confidence that the Iraqi government can eventually prevent a safehaven. But you’ve also just described the complications with the Iraqi government and thesophistication of ISIL. So is it possible that what you’ve described and your ambitions therecould take years, not months?
THE PRESIDENT: I don’t think we’re going to solve this problem in weeks, if that’s what youmean. I think this is going to take some time. The Iraqi security forces, in order to mount anoffensive and be able to operate effectively with the support of populations in Sunni areas, aregoing to have to revamp, get resupplied -- have a clearer strategy. That’s all going to bedependent on a government that the Iraqi people and the Iraqi military have confidence in.We can help in all those efforts.
I think part of what we’re able to do right now is to preserve a space for them to do the hardwork that’s necessary. If they do that, the one thing that I also think has changed is thatmany of the Sunni countries in the region who have been generally suspicious or wary of theIraqi government are more likely to join in, in the fight against ISIS, and that can beextremely helpful. But this is going to be a long-term project. 
Part of what we’ve seen is that a minority Sunni population in Iraq, as well as a majoritySunni population in Syria, has felt dissatisfied and detached and alienated from theirrespective governments. And that has been a ripe territory for these jihadists and extremiststo operate. And rebuilding governance in those areas, and legitimacy for stable, moderategoverning in those areas is going to take time.
Now, there are some immediate concerns that we have to worry about. We have to make surethat ISIL is not engaging in the actions that could cripple a country permanently. There’s keyinfrastructure inside of Iraq that we have to be concerned about. My team has been vigilant,even before ISIL went into Mosul, about foreign fighters and jihadists gathering in Syria, andnow in Iraq, who might potentially launch attacks outside the region against Western targetsand U.S. targets. So there’s going to be a counterterrorism element that we are alreadypreparing for and have been working diligently on for a long time now. 
There is going to be a military element in protecting our people, but the long-term campaignof changing that environment so that the millions of Sunnis who live in these areas feelconnected to and well-served by a national government, that’s a long-term process. Andthat’s something that the United States cannot do, only the Iraqi people themselves can do.We can help, we can advise, but we can’t do it for them. And the U.S. military cannot do it forthem.
And so this goes back to the earlier question about U.S. military involvement. The nature ofthis problem is not one that a U.S. military can solve. We can assist and our military obviouslycan play an extraordinarily important role in bolstering efforts of an Iraqi partner as theymake the right steps to keep their country together, but we can’t do it for them. 
  
Last question.
Q: America has spent 800 billion dollars in Iraq. Do you anticipate having to ask Congress foradditional funds to support this mission?
THE PRESIDENT: Currently, we are operating within the budget constraints that we alreadyhave. And we’ll have to evaluate what happens over time. We already have a lot of assets inthe region. We anticipate, when we make our preliminary budgets, that there may be thingsthat come up requiring us to engage. And right now, at least, I think we are okay. If and whenwe need additional dollars to make sure that American personnel and American facilities areprotected, then we will certainly make that request. But right now, that’s not our primaryconcern. 
Last question. 
Q: Mr. President, do you have any second thoughts about pulling all ground troops out ofIraq? And does it give you pause as the U.S. -- is it doing the same thing in Afghanistan?
THE PRESIDENT: What I just find interesting is the degree to which this issue keeps oncoming up, as if this was my decision. Under the previous administration, we had turned overthe country to a sovereign, democratically elected Iraqi government. In order for us tomaintain troops in Iraq, we needed the invitation of the Iraqi government and we neededassurances that our personnel would be immune from prosecution if, for example, they wereprotecting themselves and ended up getting in a firefight with Iraqis, that they wouldn’t behauled before an Iraqi judicial system.
And the Iraqi government, based on its political considerations, in part because Iraqis weretired of a U.S. occupation, declined to provide us those assurances. And on that basis, we left.We had offered to leave additional troops. So when you hear people say, do you regret, Mr.President, not leaving more troops, that presupposes that I would have overridden thissovereign government that we had turned the keys back over to and said, you know what,you’re democratic, you’re sovereign, except if I decide that it’s good for you to keep 10,000 or15,000 or 25,000 Marines in your country, you don’t have a choice -- which would have kindof run contrary to the entire argument we were making about turning over the country backto Iraqis, an argument not just made by me, but made by the previous administration. 
So let’s just be clear: The reason that we did not have a follow-on force in Iraq was becausethe Iraqis were -- a majority of Iraqis did not want U.S. troops there, and politically they couldnot pass the kind of laws that would be required to protect our troops in Iraq. 
Having said all that, if in fact the Iraqi government behaved the way it did over the last five,six years, where it failed to pass legislation that would reincorporate Sunnis and give them asense of ownership; if it had targeted certain Sunni leaders and jailed them; if it had alienatedsome of the Sunni tribes that we had brought back in during the so-called Awakening that
  
helped us turn the tide in 2006 -- if they had done all those things and we had had troopsthere, the country wouldn’t be holding together either. The only difference would be we’d havea bunch of troops on the ground that would be vulnerable. And however many troops we had,we would have to now be reinforcing, I’d have to be protecting them, and we’d have a muchbigger job. And probably, we would end up having to go up again in terms of the number ofgrounds troops to make sure that those forces were not vulnerable.
So that entire analysis is bogus and is wrong. But it gets frequently peddled around here byfolks who oftentimes are trying to defend previous policies that they themselves made.
Going forward with respect to Afghanistan, we are leaving the follow-on force there. I thinkthe lesson for Afghanistan is not the fact that we’ve got a follow-on force that will be capableof training and supporting Afghan security efforts. I think the real lesson in Afghanistan is thatif factions in a country after a long period of civil war do not find a way to come up with apolitical accommodation; if they take maximalist positions and their attitude is, I want 100percent of what I want and the other side gets nothing, then the center doesn’t hold. 
And the good news is, is that in part thanks to the excellent work of John Kerry and others,we now are seeing the two candidates in the recent presidential election start coming togetherand agreeing not only to move forward on the audit to be able to finally certify a winner in theelection, but also the kinds of political accommodations that are going to be required to keepdemocracy moving. 
So that’s a real lesson I think for Afghanistan coming out of Iraq is, if you want this thing towork, then whether it’s different ethnicities, different religions, different regions, they’ve gotto accommodate each other, otherwise you start tipping back into old patterns of violence.And it doesn’t matter how many U.S. troops are there -- if that happens, you end up having amess.
Thanks a lot, guys.
1
Reference is to Sinjar or Shengal Mountain, which is, or is part of, a mountainous ridge located near the Yezidi Kurdish city of Sinjar in
Nineveh province, Northwestern Iraq. 
