Let me begin by thanking Nancy for the wonderful introduction. I want to thank Dr. JosephHeyman, the chair of the Board of Trustees, as well as Dr. Jeremy Lazarus, speaker of Houseof Delegates. Thanks to all of you for bringing me home, even if it's just for a day.
From the moment I took office as President, the central challenge we've confronted as anation has been the need to lift ourselves out of the worst recession since World War II. Inrecent months, we've taken a series of extraordinary steps, not just to repair the immediatedamage to our economy, but to build a new foundation for lasting and sustained growth.We're here to create new jobs, to unfreeze our credit markets. We're stemming the loss ofhomes and the decline of home values.
All this is important. But even as we've made progress, we know that the road to prosperityremains long and it remains difficult. And we also know that one essential step on our journeyis to control the spiraling cost of health care in America. And in order to do that, we're goingto need the help of the AMA.
Today, we are spending over $2 trillion a year on health care -- almost 50 percent more perperson than the next most costly nation. And yet, as I think many of you are aware, for all ofthis spending, more of our citizens are uninsured, the quality of our care is often lower, andwe aren't any healthier. In fact, citizens in some countries that spend substantially less thanwe do are actually living longer than we do.

Make no mistake: The cost of our health care is a threat to our economy. It's an escalatingburden on our families and businesses. It's a ticking time bomb for the federal budget. And itis unsustainable for the United States of America.
It's unsustainable for Americans like Laura Klitzka, a young mother that I met in Wisconsinjust last week, who's learned that the breast cancer she thought she'd beaten had spread toher bones, but who's now being forced to spend time worrying about how to cover the$50,000 in medical debts she's already accumulated, worried about future debts that she'sgoing to accumulate, when all she wants to do is spend time with her two children and focuson getting well. These are not the worries that a woman like Laura should have to face in anation as wealthy as ours.
Stories like Laura's are being told by women and men all across this country -- by familieswho've seen out-of-pocket costs soar, and premiums double over the last decade at a ratethree times faster than wages. This is forcing Americans of all ages to go without thecheckups or the prescriptions they need -- that you know they need. It's creating a situationwhere a single illness can wipe out a lifetime of savings.
Our costly health care system is unsustainable for doctors like Michael Kahn in NewHampshire, who, as he puts it, spends 20 percent of each day supervising a staff explaininginsurance problems to patients, completing authorization forms, writing appeal letters -- aroutine that he calls disruptive and distracting, giving him less time to do what he became adoctor to do and actually care for his patients.
Small business owners like Chris and Becky Link in Nashville are also struggling. They'vealways wanted to do right by the workers at their family-run marketing firm, but they'verecently had to do the unthinkable and lay off a number of employees -- layoffs that couldhave been deferred, they say, if health care costs weren't so high. Across the country, overone-third of small businesses have reduced benefits in recent years and one-third havedropped their workers' coverage altogether since the early '90s.
Our largest companies are suffering, as well. A big part of what led General Motors andChrysler into trouble in recent decades were the huge costs they racked up providing healthcare for their workers -- costs that made them less profitable and less competitive withautomakers around the world. If we do not fix our health care system, America may go theway of GM -- paying more, getting less, and going broke.
When it comes to the cost of our health care, then, the status quo is unsustainable. So reformis not a luxury; it is a necessity. When I hear people say, well, why are you taking this onright now, you've got all these other problems, I keep on reminding people I'd love to be ableto defer these issues, but we can't. I know there's been much discussion about what reformwould cost, and rightly so. This is a test of whether we -- Democrats and Republicans alike --are serious about holding the line on new spending and restoring fiscal discipline.

But let there be no doubt -- the cost of inaction is greater. If we fail to act -- if we fail to act --and you know this because you see it in your own individual practices -- if we fail to act,premiums will climb higher, benefits will erode further, the rolls of the uninsured will swell toinclude millions more Americans -- all of which will affect your practice.
If we fail to act, one out of every five dollars we earn will be spent on health care within adecade. And in 30 years, it will be about one out of every three -- a trend that will mean lostjobs, lower take-home pay, shuttered businesses, and a lower standard of living for allAmericans.
And if we fail to act, federal spending on Medicaid and Medicare will grow over the comingdecades by an amount almost equal to the amount our government currently spends on ournation's defense. It will, in fact, eventually grow larger than what our government spends onanything else today. It's a scenario that will swamp our federal and state budgets, and imposea vicious choice of either unprecedented tax hikes, or overwhelming deficits, or drastic cuts inour federal and state budgets.
So to say it as plainly as I can, health care is the single most important thing we can do forAmerica's long-term fiscal health. That is a fact. That's a fact.
It's a fact, and the truth is most people know that it's a fact. And yet, as clear as it is that oursystem badly needs reform, reform is not inevitable. There's a sense out there among some,and perhaps some members who are gathered here today of the AMA, that as bad as ourcurrent system may be -- and it's pretty bad -- the devil we know is better than the devil wedon't. There's a fear of change -- a worry that we may lose what works about our health caresystem while trying to fix what doesn't.
I'm here to tell you I understand that fear. And I understand the cynicism. They're scars leftover from past efforts at reform. After all, Presidents have called for health care reform fornearly a century. Teddy Roosevelt called for it. Harry Truman called for it. Richard Nixoncalled for it. Jimmy Carter called for it. Bill Clinton called for it. But while significant individualreforms have been made -- such as Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children's Health InsuranceProgram -- efforts at comprehensive reform that covers everyone and brings down costs havelargely failed.
Part of the reason is because the different groups involved -- doctors, insurance companies,businesses, workers, and others -- simply couldn't agree on the need for reform or whatshape it would take. And if we're honest, another part of the reason has been the fierceopposition fueled by some interest groups and lobbyists -- opposition that has used feartactics to paint any effort to achieve reform as an attempt to, yes, socialize medicine.
And despite this long history of failure, I'm standing here because I think we're in a differenttime.

One sign that things are different is that just this past week, the Senate passed a bill that willprotect children from the dangers of smoking, a reform the AMA has long championed -- thisorganization long championed; it went nowhere when it was proposed a decade ago -- I'mgoing to sign this into law. 
Now, what makes this moment different is that this time -- for the first time -- keystakeholders are aligning not against, but in favor of reform. They're coming out -- they'recoming together out of a recognition that while reform will take everyone in our health carecommunity to do their part -- everybody is going to have to pitch in -- ultimately, everybodywill benefit.
And I want to commend the AMA, in particular, for offering to do your part to curb costs andachieve reform. Just a week ago, you joined together with hospitals, labor unions, insurers,medical device manufacturers and drug companies to do something that would have beenunthinkable just a few years ago -- you promised to work together to cut national health carespending by $2 trillion over the next decade, relative to what it would have otherwise been.And that will bring down costs; that will bring down premiums. That's exactly the kind ofcooperation we need, and we appreciate that very much. Thank you.
Now, the question is how do we finish the job? How do we permanently bring down costs andmake quality, affordable health care available to every single American? That's what I've cometo talk about today. We know the moment is right for health care reform. We know this is ahistoric opportunity we've never seen before and may not see again. But we also know thatthere are those who will try and scuttle this opportunity no matter what -- who will use thesame scare tactics and fear-mongering that's worked in the past; who will give warningsabout socialized medicine and government takeovers, long lines and rationed care, decisionsmade by bureaucrats and not doctors. We have heard this all before. And because these feartactics have worked, things have kept getting worse.
So let me begin by saying this to you and to the American people: I know that there aremillions of Americans who are content with their health care coverage -- they like their planand, most importantly, they value their relationship with their doctor. They trust you. And thatmeans that no matter how we reform health care, we will keep this promise to the Americanpeople: If you like your doctor, you will be able to keep your doctor, period. If you like yourhealth care plan, you'll be able to keep your health care plan, period. No one will take it away,no matter what. My view is that health care reform should be guided by a simple principle: Fixwhat's broken and build on what works. And that's what we intend to do.
If we do that, we can build a health care system that allows you to be physicians instead ofadministrators and accountants; a system that gives Americans -- a system that givesAmericans the best care at the lowest cost; a system that eases up the pressure onbusinesses and unleashes the promise of our economy, creating hundreds of thousands ofjobs, making take-home wages thousands of dollars higher, and growing our economy by tensof billions of dollars more every year.

That's how we'll stop spending tax dollars to prop up an unsustainable system, and startinvesting those dollars in innovations and advances that will make our health care system andour economy stronger. That's what we can do with this opportunity. And that's what we mustdo with this moment.
Now, the good news is that in some instances, there's already widespread agreement on thesteps necessary to make our health care system work better. First, we need to upgrade ourmedical records by switching from a paper to an electronic system of record keeping. Andwe've already begun to do this with an investment we made as part of our Recovery Act.
It simply doesn't make sense that patients in the 21st century are still filling out forms withpens on papers that have to be stored away somewhere. As Newt Gingrich has rightly pointedout -- and I don't quote Newt Gingrich that often -- we do a better job tracking a FedExpackage in this country than we do tracking patients' health records.
You shouldn't have to tell every new doctor you see about your medical history or whatprescriptions you're taking. You shouldn't have to repeat costly tests. All that informationshould be stored securely in a private medical record so that your information can be trackedfrom one doctor to another -- even if you change jobs, even if you move, even if you have tosee a number of different specialists. That's just common sense.
And that will not only mean less paper-pushing and lower administrative costs, savingtaxpayers billions of dollars; it will also mean all of you physicians will have an easier timedoing your jobs. It will tell you, the doctors, what drugs a patient is taking so you can avoidprescribing a medication that could cause a harmful interaction. It will prevent the wrongdosages from going to a patient. It will reduce medical errors, it's estimated, that lead to100,000 lives lost unnecessarily in our hospitals every year.
So there shouldn't be an argument there. And we want to make sure that we're helpingproviders computerize so that we can get this system up and running.
The second step that we can all agree on is to invest more in preventive care so we can avoidillness and disease in the first place. That starts with each of us taking more responsibility forour health and for the health of our children. It means quitting smoking. It means going in forthat mammogram or colon cancer screening. It means going for a run or hitting the gym, andraising our children to step away from the video games and spend more time playing outside.
It also means cutting down on all the junk food that's fueling an epidemic of obesity -- whichputs far too many Americans, young and old, at greater risk of costly, chronic conditions.That's a lesson Michelle and I have tried to instill in our daughters. As some of you know, westarted a White House vegetable garden. I say "we" generously, because Michelle has donemost of the work. That's a lesson that we should work with local school districts to incorporateinto their school lunch programs.

Building a health care system that promotes prevention rather than just managing diseaseswill require all of us to do our parts. It will take doctors telling us what risk factors we shouldavoid and what preventive measures we should pursue. It will take employers following theexample of places like Safeway that is rewarding workers for taking better care of their healthwhile reducing health care costs in the process.
If you're one of three-quarters of Safeway workers enrolled in their "Healthy Measures"program, you can get screened for problems like high cholesterol or high blood pressure. Andif you score well, you can pay lower premiums; you get more money in your paycheck. It's aprogram that has helped Safeway cut health care spending by 13 percent, and workers saveover 20 percent on their premiums. And we're open to doing more to help employers adoptand expand programs like this one.
Our federal government also has to step up its efforts to advance the cause of healthy living.Five of the costliest illnesses and conditions -- cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, lungdisease, and strokes -- can be prevented. And yet only a fraction of every health care dollargoes to prevention or public health. And that's starting to change with an investment we'remaking in prevention and wellness programs that can help us avoid disease that harm ourhealth and the health of our economy.
But as important as they are, investments in electronic records and preventive care, all thethings that I've just mentioned, they're just preliminary steps. They will only make a dent inthe epidemic of rising costs in this country.
Despite what some have suggested, the reason we have these spiraling costs is not simplybecause we've got an aging population; demographics do account for part of rising costsbecause older, sicker societies pay more on health care than younger, healthier ones, andthere's nothing intrinsically wrong in us taking better care of ourselves. But what accounts forthe bulk of our costs is the nature of our health care delivery system itself -- a system wherewe spend vast amounts of money on things that aren't necessarily making our people anyhealthier; a system that automatically equates more expensive care with better care.
Now, a recent article in the New Yorker, for example, showed how McAllen, Texas, is spendingtwice as much as El Paso County -- twice as much -- not because people in McAllen, Texas,are sicker than they are in El Paso; not because they're getting better care or getting betteroutcomes.
It's simply because they're using more treatments -- treatments that, in some cases, theydon't really need; treatments that, in some cases, can actually do people harm by raising therisk of infection or medical error.
And the problem is this pattern is repeating itself across America. One Dartmouth study showsthat you're less likely -- you're no less likely to die from a heart attack and other ailments in ahigher-spending area than in a lower-spending one.

There are two main reasons for this. The first is a system of incentives where the more testsand services are provided, the more money we pay. And a lot of people in this room knowwhat I'm talking about. It's a model that rewards the quantity of care rather than the qualityof care; that pushes you, the doctor, to see more and more patients even if you can't spendmuch time with each, and gives you every incentive to order that extra MRI or EKG, even ifit's not necessary. It's a model that has taken the pursuit of medicine from a profession -- acalling -- to a business.
That's not why you became doctors. That's not why you put in all those hours in the AnatomySuite or the O.R. That's not what brings you back to a patient's bedside to check in, or makesyou call a loved one of a patient to say it will be fine. You didn't enter this profession to bebean-counters and paper-pushers. You entered this profession to be healers. And that's whatour health care system should let you be. That's what this health care system should let yoube. 
Now, that starts with reforming the way we compensate our providers -- doctors andhospitals. We need to bundle payments so you aren't paid for every single treatment you offera patient with a chronic condition like diabetes, but instead paid well for how you treat theoverall disease. We need to create incentives for physicians to team up, because we know thatwhen that happens, it results in a healthier patient. We need to give doctors bonuses for goodhealth outcomes, so we're not promoting just more treatment, but better care.
And we need to rethink the cost of a medical education, and do more to reward medicalstudents who choose a career as a primary care physician -- who choose to work inunderserved areas instead of the more lucrative paths. That's why we're making a substantialinvestment in the National Health Service Corps that will make medical training moreaffordable for primary care doctors and nurse practitioners so they aren't drowning in debtwhen they enter the workforce. Somebody back there is drowning in debt.
The second structural reform we need to make is to improve the quality of medicalinformation making its way to doctors and patients. We have the best medical schools, themost sophisticated labs, the most advanced training of any nation on the globe. Yet we're notdoing a very good job harnessing our collective knowledge and experience on behalf of bettermedicine.
Less than 1 percent of our health care spending goes to examining what treatments are mosteffective -- less than 1 percent. And even when that information finds its way into journals, itcan take up to 17 years to find its way to an exam room or operating table. As a result, toomany doctors and patients are making decisions without the benefit of the latest research.
A recent study, for example, found that only half of all cardiac guidelines are based onscientific evidence -- half.

That means doctors may be doing a bypass operation when placing a stent is equallyeffective; or placing a stent when adjusting a patient's drug and medical management isequally effective -- all of which drives up costs without improving a patient's health.
So one thing we need to do is to figure out what works, and encourage rapid implementationof what works into your practices. That's why we're making a major investment in research toidentify the best treatments for a variety of ailments and conditions.
Now, let me be clear -- I just want to clear something up here -- identifying what works is notabout dictating what kind of care should be provided. It's about providing patients and doctorswith the information they need to make the best medical decisions. See, I have theassumption that if you have good information about what makes your patients well, that'swhat you're going to do. I have confidence in that. We're not going to need to force you to doit. We just need to make sure you've got the best information available.
Still, even when we do know what works, we are often not making the most of it. And that'swhy we need to build on the examples of outstanding medicine at places like the CincinnatiChildren's Hospital, where the quality of care for cystic fibrosis patients shot up after thehospital began incorporating suggestions from parents. And places like Tallahassee MemorialHealth Care, where deaths were dramatically reduced with rapid response teams thatmonitored patients' conditions, and "multidisciplinary rounds" with everyone from physiciansto pharmacists. And places like Geisinger Health System in rural Pennsylvania, andIntermountain Health in Salt Lake City, where high-quality care is being provided at a costwell below the national average. These are all islands of excellence that we need to make thestandard in our health care system.
So replicating best practices, incentivizing excellence, closing cost disparities -- any legislationsent to my desk that does not these -- does not achieve these goals in my mind does not earnthe title of reform.
But my signature on a bill is not enough. I need your help, doctors, because to mostAmericans you are the health care system. The fact is Americans -- and I include myself andMichelle and our kids in this -- we just do what you tell us to do. That's what we do. We listento you, we trust you. And that's why I will listen to you and work with you to pursue reformthat works for you. 
Together, if we take all these steps, I am convinced we can bring spending down, bringquality up; we can save hundreds of billions of dollars on health care costs while making ourhealth care system work better for patients and doctors alike. And when we align the interestsof patients and doctors, then we're going to be in a good place.
Now, I recognize that it will be hard to make some of these changes if doctors feel like they'reconstantly looking over their shoulders for fear of lawsuits. I recognize that. Don't get tooexcited yet.

Now, I understand some doctors may feel the need to order more tests and treatments toavoid being legally vulnerable. That's a real issue. Now, just hold on to your horses here,guys. I want to be honest with you. I'm not advocating caps on malpractice awards -- which Ipersonally believe can be unfair to people who've been wrongfully harmed.
But I do think we need to explore a range of ideas about how to put patient safety first; howto let doctors focus on practicing medicine; how to encourage broader use of evidence-basedguidelines. I want to work with the AMA so we can scale back the excessive defensivemedicine that reinforces our current system, and shift to a system where we are providingbetter care, simply -- rather than simply more treatment.
So this is going to be a priority for me. And I know, based on your responses, it's a priority foryou. And I look forward to working with you. And it's going to be difficult. But all this stuff isgoing to be difficult. All of it's going to be important.
Now, I know this has been a long speech, but we got more to do. The changes that I havealready spoken about, all that is going to need to go hand-in-hand with other reforms.Because our health care system is so complex and medicine is always evolving, we need away to continually evaluate how we can eliminate waste, reduce costs, and improve quality.
That's why I'm open to expanding the role of a commission created by a Republican Congresscalled the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, which happens to include a number ofphysicians on the commission. In recent years, this commission proposed roughly $200 billionin savings that never made it into law. These recommendations have now been incorporatedinto our broader reform agenda, but we need to fast-track their proposals, the commission'sproposals, in the future so that we don't miss another opportunity to save billions of dollars,as we gain more information about what works and what doesn't work in our health caresystem.
And as we seek to contain the cost of health care, we also have to ensure that every Americancan get coverage they can afford. We must do so in part because it's in all of our economicinterests. Each time an uninsured American steps foot into an emergency room with no way toreimburse the hospital for care, the cost is handed over to every American family as a bill ofabout $1,000 that's reflected in higher taxes, higher premiums, and higher health care costs.It's a hidden tax, a hidden bill that will be cut as we insure all Americans. And as we insureevery young and healthy American, it will spread out risk for insurance companies, furtherreducing costs for everyone.
But alongside these economic arguments, there's another, more powerful one. And it is simplythis: We are not a nation that accepts nearly 46 million uninsured men, women and children.We are not a nation that lets hardworking families go without coverage, or turns its back onthose in need. We're a nation that cares for its citizens. We look out for one another. That'swhat makes us the United States of America. We need to get this done.

So we need to do a few things to provide affordable health insurance to every singleAmerican. The first thing we need to do is to protect what's working in our health caresystem. So just in case you didn't catch it the first time, let me repeat: If you like your healthcare system and your doctor, the only thing reform will mean to you is your health care willcost less. If anyone says otherwise, they are either trying to mislead you or don't have theirfacts straight.
Now, if you don't like your health care coverage or you don't have any insurance at all, you'llhave a chance, under what we've proposed, to take part in what we're calling a HealthInsurance Exchange. This exchange will allow you to one-stop shop for a health care plan,compare benefits and prices, and choose a plan that's best for you and your family -- thesame way, by the way, that federal employees can do, from a postal worker to a member ofCongress. You will have your choice of a number of plans that offer a few different packages,but every plan would offer an affordable, basic package.
Again, this is for people who aren't happy with their current plan. If you like what you'regetting, keep it. Nobody is forcing you to shift. But if you're not, this gives you some newoptions. And I believe one of these options needs to be a public option that will give people abroader range of choices -- and inject competition into the health care market so that force --so that we can force waste out of the system and keep the insurance companies honest.
Now, I know that there's some concern about a public option. Even within this organizationthere's healthy debate about it. In particular, I understand that you're concerned that today'sMedicare rates, which many of you already feel are too low, will be applied broadly in a waythat means our cost savings are coming off your backs.
And these are legitimate concerns, but they're ones, I believe, that can be overcome. As Istated earlier, the reforms we propose to reimbursement are to reward best practices, focuson patient care, not on the current piecework reimbursements. What we seek is more stabilityand a health care system that's on a sounder financial footing.
And the fact is these reforms need to take place regardless of whether there's a public optionor not. With reform, we will ensure that you are being reimbursed in a thoughtful way that'stied to patient outcomes, instead of relying on yearly negotiations about the SustainableGrowth Rate formula that's based on politics and the immediate state of the federal budget inany given year.
And I just want to point out the alternative to such reform is a world where health care costsgrow at an unsustainable rate. And if you don't think that's going to threaten yourreimbursements and the stability of our health care system, you haven't been payingattention.
So the public option is not your enemy; it is your friend, I believe.

Let me also say that -- let me also address a illegitimate concern that's being put forward bythose who are claiming that a public option is somehow a Trojan horse for a single-payersystem. I'll be honest; there are countries where a single-payer system works pretty well. ButI believe -- and I've taken some flak from members of my own party for this belief -- that it'simportant for our reform efforts to build on our traditions here in the United States. So whenyou hear the naysayers claim that I'm trying to bring about government-run health care,know this: They're not telling the truth.
What I am trying to do -- and what a public option will help do -- is put affordable health carewithin reach for millions of Americans. And to help ensure that everyone can afford the cost ofa health care option in our exchange, we need to provide assistance to families who need it.That way, there will be no reason at all for anyone to remain uninsured.
Indeed, it's because I'm confident in our ability to give people the ability to get insurance atan affordable rate that I'm open to a system where every American bears responsibility forowning health insurance -- so long as we provide a hardship waiver for those who still can'tafford it as we move towards this system.
The same is true for employers. While I believe every business has a responsibility to providehealth insurance for its workers, small businesses that can't afford it should receive anexemption. And small business workers and their families will be able to seek coverage in theexchange if their employer is not able to provide it.
Now, here's some good news. Insurance companies have expressed support for the idea ofcovering the uninsured and they certainly are in favor of a mandate. I welcome theirwillingness to engage constructively in the reform debate. I'm glad they're at the table. Butwhat I refuse to do is simply create a system where insurance companies suddenly have awhole bunch of more customers on Uncle Sam's dime, but still fail to meet theirresponsibilities. We're not going to do that.
Let me give you an example of what I'm talking about. We need to end the practice ofdenying coverage on the basis of preexisting conditions. The days of cherry-picking who tocover and who to deny, those days are over. I know you see it in your practices, and howincredibly painful and frustrating it is -- you want to give somebody care and you find out thatthe insurance companies are wiggling out of paying.
This is personal for me also. I've told this story before. I'll never forget watching my ownmother, as she fought cancer in her final days, spending time worrying about whether herinsurer would claim her illness was a preexisting condition so it could get out of providingcoverage. Changing the current approach to preexisting conditions is the least we can do --for my mother and for every other mother, father, son, and daughter, who has suffered underthis practice, who've been paying premiums and don't get care. We need to put health carewithin the reach for millions of Americans.

Now, even if we accept all of the economic and moral reasons for providing affordablecoverage to all Americans, there is no denying that expanding coverage will come at a cost, atleast in the short run. But it is a cost that will not -- I repeat -- will not add to our deficits. I'veset down a rule for my staff, for my team -- and I've said this to Congress -- health carereform must be, and will be, deficit-neutral in the next decade.
Now, there are already voices saying the numbers don't add up. They're wrong. Here's why.Making health care affordable for all Americans will cost somewhere on the order of $1 trillionover the next 10 years. That's real money, even in Washington. But remember, that's lessthan we are projected to have spent on the war in Iraq. And also remember, failing to reformour health care system in a way that genuinely reduces cost growth will cost us trillions ofdollars more in lost economic growth and lower wages.
That said, let me explain how we will cover the price tag. First, as part of the budget that waspassed a few months ago, we put aside $635 billion over 10 years in what we're calling aHealth Reserve Fund. Over half of that amount -- more than $300 billion -- will come fromraising revenue by doing things like modestly limiting the tax deductions the wealthiestAmericans can take to the same level that it was at the end of the Reagan years -- same levelthat it was under Ronald Reagan. Some are concerned that this will dramatically reducecharitable giving, for example, but statistics show that's not true. And the best thing for ourcharities is the stronger economy that we will build with health care reform.
But we can't just raise revenues. We're also going to have to make spending cuts, in part byexamining inefficiencies in our current Medicare program. There are going to be robustdebates about where these cuts should be made, and I welcome that debate. But here'swhere I think these cuts should be made.
First, we should end overpayments to Medicare Advantage. Today, we're paying MedicareAdvantage plans much more than we pay for traditional Medicare services. Now, this is a gooddeal for insurance companies. It's a subsidy to insurance companies. It's not a good deal foryou. It's not a good deal for the American people. And by the way, it doesn't follow freemarket principles, for those who are always talking about free market principles. That's whywe need to introduce competitive bidding into the Medicare Advantage program, a programunder which private insurance companies are offering Medicare coverage. That alone will save$177 billion over the next decade, just that one step.
Second, we need to use Medicare reimbursements to reduce preventable hospitalreadmissions. Right now, almost 20 percent of Medicare patients discharged from hospitalsare readmitted within a month, often because they're not getting the comprehensive care thatthey need. This puts people at risk; it drives up cost. By changing how Medicare reimburseshospitals, we can discourage them from acting in a way that boosts profits but drives up costsfor everyone else. That will save us $25 billion over the next decade.

Third, we need to introduce generic biologic drugs into the marketplace.These are drugs usedto treat illnesses like anemia. But right now, there is no pathway at the FDA for approvinggeneric versions of these drugs. Creating such a pathway will save us billions of dollars. Wecan save another roughly $30 billion by getting a better deal for our poorer seniors whileasking our well-off seniors to pay a little more for their drugs.
So that's the bulk of what's in the Health Reserve Fund. I've also proposed saving another$313 billion in Medicare and Medicaid spending in several other ways. One way is by adjustingMedicare payments to reflect new advances and productivity gains in our economy. Right now,Medicare payments are rising each year by more than they should. These adjustments willcreate incentives for providers to deliver care more efficiently, and save us roughly $109billion in the process.
Another way we can achieve savings is by reducing payments to hospitals for treatinguninsured people. I know hospitals rely on these payments now, legitimately, because of thelarge number of uninsured patients that they treat. But if we put in a system where peoplehave coverage and the number of uninsured people goes down with our reforms, the amountwe pay hospitals to treat uninsured people should go down, as well. Reducing these paymentsgradually, as more and more people have coverage, will save us over $106 billion. And we'llmake sure the difference goes to the hospitals that need it most.
We can also save about $75 billion through more efficient purchasing of prescription drugs.And we can save about $1 billion more by rooting out waste, abuse, fraud throughout ourhealth care system so that no one is charging more for a service than it's worth or charging adime for a service that they don't provide.
Let me be clear: I'm committed to making these cuts in a way that protects our seniorcitizens. In fact, these proposals will actually extend the life of the Medicare Trust Fund byseven years, and reduce premiums for Medicare beneficiaries by roughly $43 billion over thenext 10 years. And I'm working with AARP to uphold that commitment.
Now, for those of you who took out your pencil and paper -- altogether, these savings meanthat we've put about $950 billion on the table -- and that doesn't count some of the long-termsavings that we think will come about from reform -- from medical IT, for example, orincreased investment in prevention. So that stuff in congressional jargon is not scorable; theCongressional Budget Office won't count that as savings, so we're setting that aside. We thinkthat's going to come, but even separate and far from that, we've put $950 billion on the table,taking us almost all the way to covering the full cost of health care reform.
In the weeks and months ahead, I look forward to working with Congress to make up thedifference so that health care reform is fully paid for -- in a real, accountable way. And let meadd that this does not count longer-term savings. I just want to repeat that.

By insisting that the reforms that we're introducing are deficit-neutral over the next decade,and by making the reforms that will help slow the growth rate of health care costs over thecoming decades -- bending the curve -- we can look forward to faster economic growth,higher living standards, and falling, instead of rising, budget deficits.
Now, let me just wrap up by saying this. I know people are cynical whether we can do this ornot. I know there will be disagreements about how to proceed in the days ahead. There'sprobably healthy debate within the AMA. That's good. I also know this: We can't let thismoment pass us by.
You know, the other day, a friend of mine, Congressman Earl Blumenauer, handed me amagazine with a special issue titled, "The Crisis in American Medicine." One article notes"soaring charges." Another warns about the "volume of utilization of services." Another asks ifwe can find a "better way than fee-for-service for paying for medical care." It speaks to manyof the challenges we face today. The thing is, this special issue was published by Harper'sMagazine in October of 1960 -- before I was born.
Members of the American Medical Association, and my fellow Americans, I'm here todaybecause I don't want our children and their children to still be speaking of a crisis in Americanmedicine 50 years from now. I don't want them to still be suffering from spiraling costs thatwe did not stem, or sicknesses that we did not cure. I don't want them to be burdened withmassive deficits we did not curb or a worsening economy that we did not rebuild.
I want them to benefit from a health care system that works for all of us; where families canopen a doctor's bill without dreading what's inside; where parents are talking to their kids andgetting them to get regular checkups, and testing themselves for preventable ailments; whereparents are feeding their kids healthier food and kids are exercising more; where patients arespending more time with their doctors, and doctors can pull up on a computer all the medicalinformation and latest research they'll ever want to know to meet patients' needs; whereorthopedists and nephrologists and oncologists are all working together to treat a singlehuman being; where what's best about America's health care system has become thehallmark of America's health care system.
That's the health care system we can build. That's the future I'm convinced is within ourreach.
And if we're willing to come together and bring about that future, then we will not only makeAmericans healthier, we will not only unleash America's economic potential, but we willreaffirm the ideals that led you into this noble profession and we'll build a health care systemthat lets all Americans heal.
Thank you very much, AMA. Appreciate it, thank you.