Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, distinguished guests, and fellowAmericans:
Tonight I want to begin by congratulating the men and women of the 112th Congress, as wellas your new Speaker, John Boehner. And as we mark this occasion, we’re also mindful of theempty chair in this chamber, and we pray for the health of our colleague -- and our friend --Gabby Giffords.
It’s no secret that those of us here tonight have had our differences over the last two years. The debates have been contentious; we have fought fiercely for our beliefs.  And that’s a goodthing.  That’s what a robust democracy demands.  That’s what helps set us apart as a nation.
But there’s a reason the tragedy in Tucson gave us pause. Amid all the noise and passion andrancor of our public debate, Tucson reminded us that no matter who we are or where wecome from, each of us is a part of something greater -- something more consequential thanparty or political preference.
We are part of the American family.  We believe that in a country where every race and faithand point of view can be found, we are still bound together as one people; that we sharecommon hopes and a common creed; that the dreams of a little girl in Tucson are not sodifferent than those of our own children, and that they all deserve the chance to be fulfilled.
That, too, is what sets us apart as a nation.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
Now, by itself, this simple recognition won’t usher in a new era of cooperation.  What comesof this moment is up to us.  What comes of this moment will be determined not by whetherwe can sit together tonight, but whether we can work together tomorrow.
I believe we can.  And I believe we must.  That’s what the people who sent us here expect ofus.  With their votes, they’ve determined that governing will now be a shared responsibilitybetween parties.  New laws will only pass with support from Democrats and Republicans.  Wewill move forward together, or not at all -- for the challenges we face are bigger than party,and bigger than politics.
At stake right now is not who wins the next election -- after all, we just had an election.  Atstake is whether new jobs and industries take root in this country, or somewhere else.  It’swhether the hard work and industry of our people is rewarded.  It’s whether we sustain theleadership that has made America not just a place on a map, but the light to the world.
We are poised for progress.  Two years after the worst recession most of us have ever known,the stock market has come roaring back.  Corporate profits are up.  The economy is growingagain.
But we have never measured progress by these yardsticks alone.  We measure progress bythe success of our people.  By the jobs they can find and the quality of life those jobs offer. By the prospects of a small business owner who dreams of turning a good idea into a thrivingenterprise.  By the opportunities for a better life that we pass on to our children.
That’s the project the American people want us to work on. Together.
We did that in December.  Thanks to the tax cuts we passed, Americans’ paychecks are a littlebigger today.  Every business can write off the full cost of new investments that they makethis year.  And these steps, taken by Democrats and Republicans, will grow the economy andadd to the more than one million private sector jobs created last year.
But we have to do more.  These steps we’ve taken over the last two years may have brokenthe back of this recession, but to win the future, we’ll need to take on challenges that havebeen decades in the making.
Many people watching tonight can probably remember a time when finding a good job meantshowing up at a nearby factory or a business downtown.  You didn’t always need a degree,and your competition was pretty much limited to your neighbors.  If you worked hard,chances are you’d have a job for life, with a decent paycheck and good benefits and theoccasional promotion.  Maybe you’d even have the pride of seeing your kids work at the samecompany.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
That world has changed.  And for many, the change has been painful.  I’ve seen it in theshuttered windows of once booming factories, and the vacant storefronts on once busy MainStreets. I’ve heard it in the frustrations of Americans who’ve seen their paychecks dwindle ortheir jobs disappear -- proud men and women who feel like the rules have been changed inthe middle of the game.
They’re right.  The rules have changed.  In a single generation, revolutions in technology havetransformed the way we live, work and do business.  Steel mills that once needed 1,000workers can now do the same work with 100.  Today, just about any company can set upshop, hire workers, and sell their products wherever there’s an Internet connection.
Meanwhile, nations like China and India realized that with some changes of their own, theycould compete in this new world. And so they started educating their children earlier andlonger, with greater emphasis on math and science.  They’re investing in research and newtechnologies.  Just recently, China became the home to the world’s largest private solarresearch facility, and the world’s fastest computer.
So, yes, the world has changed.  The competition for jobs is real.  But this shouldn’tdiscourage us.  It should challenge us. Remember -- for all the hits we’ve taken these last fewyears, for all the naysayers predicting our decline, America still has the largest, mostprosperous economy in the world.  No workers -- no workers are more productive than ours. No country has more successful companies, or grants more patents to inventors andentrepreneurs.  We’re the home to the world’s best colleges and universities, where morestudents come to study than any place on Earth.
What’s more, we are the first nation to be founded for the sake of an idea -- the idea thateach of us deserves the chance to shape our own destiny.  That’s why centuries of pioneersand immigrants have risked everything to come here.  It’s why our students don’t justmemorize equations, but answer questions like “What do you think of that idea?  What wouldyou change about the world?  What do you want to be when you grow up?”
The future is ours to win.  But to get there, we can’t just stand still.  As Robert Kennedy toldus, “The future is not a gift.  It is an achievement.”  Sustaining the American Dream has neverbeen about standing pat.  It has required each generation to sacrifice, and struggle, and meetthe demands of a new age.
And now it’s our turn.  We know what it takes to compete for the jobs and industries of ourtime.  We need to out-innovate, out-educate, and out-build the rest of the world. We have tomake America the best place on Earth to do business.  We need to take responsibility for ourdeficit and reform our government.  That’s how our people will prosper.  That’s how we’ll winthe future.  And tonight, I’d like to talk about how we get there.                                  
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
The first step in winning the future is encouraging American innovation.  None of us canpredict with certainty what the next big industry will be or where the new jobs will comefrom.  Thirty years ago, we couldn’t know that something called the Internet would lead to aneconomic revolution.  What we can do -- what America does better than anyone else -- isspark the creativity and imagination of our people.  We’re the nation that put cars indriveways and computers in offices; the nation of Edison and the Wright brothers; of Googleand Facebook.  In America, innovation doesn’t just change our lives.  It is how we make ourliving.
Our free enterprise system is what drives innovation.  But because it’s not always profitablefor companies to invest in basic research, throughout our history, our government hasprovided cutting-edge scientists and inventors with the support that they need.  That’s whatplanted the seeds for the Internet.  That’s what helped make possible things like computerchips and GPS.  Just think of all the good jobs -- from manufacturing to retail -- that havecome from these breakthroughs.
Half a century ago, when the Soviets beat us into space with the launch of a satellite calledSputnik, we had no idea how we would beat them to the moon.  The science wasn’t eventhere yet.  NASA didn’t exist.  But after investing in better research and education, we didn’tjust surpass the Soviets; we unleashed a wave of innovation that created new industries andmillions of new jobs.
This is our generation’s Sputnik moment.  Two years ago, I said that we needed to reach alevel of research and development we haven’t seen since the height of the Space Race.  Andin a few weeks, I will be sending a budget to Congress that helps us meet that goal.  We’llinvest in biomedical research, information technology, and especially clean energy technology-- an investment that will strengthen our security, protect our planet, and create countlessnew jobs for our people.
Already, we’re seeing the promise of renewable energy.  Robert and Gary Allen are brotherswho run a small Michigan roofing company.  After September 11th, they volunteered theirbest roofers to help repair the Pentagon.  But half of their factory went unused, and therecession hit them hard.  Today, with the help of a government loan, that empty space isbeing used to manufacture solar shingles that are being sold all across the country.  InRobert’s words, “We reinvented ourselves.”
That’s what Americans have done for over 200 years: reinvented ourselves.  And to spur onmore success stories like the Allen Brothers, we’ve begun to reinvent our energy policy. We’renot just handing out money.  We’re issuing a challenge.  We’re telling America’s scientists andengineers that if they assemble teams of the best minds in their fields, and focus on thehardest problems in clean energy, we’ll fund the Apollo projects of our time.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
At the California Institute of Technology, they’re developing a way to turn sunlight and waterinto fuel for our cars.  At Oak Ridge National Laboratory, they’re using supercomputers to geta lot more power out of our nuclear facilities.  With more research and incentives, we canbreak our dependence on oil with biofuels, and become the first country to have a millionelectric vehicles on the road by 2015.
We need to get behind this innovation.  And to help pay for it, I’m asking Congress toeliminate the billions in taxpayer dollars we currently give to oil companies.  I don’t know if --I don’t know if you’ve noticed, but they’re doing just fine on their own. So instead ofsubsidizing yesterday’s energy, let’s invest in tomorrow’s.
Now, clean energy breakthroughs will only translate into clean energy jobs if businesses knowthere will be a market for what they’re selling.  So tonight, I challenge you to join me insetting a new goal:  By 2035, 80 percent of America’s electricity will come from clean energysources.
Some folks want wind and solar.  Others want nuclear, clean coal and natural gas.  To meetthis goal, we will need them all -- and I urge Democrats and Republicans to work together tomake it happen.
Maintaining our leadership in research and technology is crucial to America’s success.  But ifwe want to win the future -- if we want innovation to produce jobs in America and notoverseas -- then we also have to win the race to educate our kids.
Think about it.  Over the next 10 years, nearly half of all new jobs will require education thatgoes beyond a high school education.  And yet, as many as a quarter of our students aren’teven finishing high school.  The quality of our math and science education lags behind manyother nations.  America has fallen to ninth in the proportion of young people with a collegedegree.  And so the question is whether all of us -- as citizens, and as parents -- are willing todo what’s necessary to give every child a chance to succeed.
That responsibility begins not in our classrooms, but in our homes and communities.  It’sfamily that first instills the love of learning in a child.  Only parents can make sure the TV isturned off and homework gets done.  We need to teach our kids that it’s not just the winner ofthe Super Bowl who deserves to be celebrated, but the winner of the science fair.  We need toteach them that success is not a function of fame or PR, but of hard work and discipline.
Our schools share this responsibility.  When a child walks into a classroom, it should be aplace of high expectations and high performance.  But too many schools don’t meet this test.That’s why instead of just pouring money into a system that’s not working, we launched acompetition called Race to the Top.  To all 50 states, we said, “If you show us the mostinnovative plans to improve teacher quality and student achievement, we’ll show you themoney.”
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
Race to the Top is the most meaningful reform of our public schools in a generation.  For lessthan 1 percent of what we spend on education each year, it has led over 40 states to raisetheir standards for teaching and learning.  And these standards were developed, by the way,not by Washington, but by Republican and Democratic governors throughout the country. And Race to the Top should be the approach we follow this year as we replace No Child LeftBehind with a law that’s more flexible and focused on what’s best for our kids.
You see, we know what’s possible from our children when reform isn’t just a top-downmandate, but the work of local teachers and principals, school boards and communities.  Takea school like Bruce Randolph in Denver.  Three years ago, it was rated one of the worstschools in Colorado -- located on turf between two rival gangs.  But last May, 97 percent ofthe seniors received their diploma.  Most will be the first in their families to go to college.  Andafter the first year of the school’s transformation, the principal who made it possible wipedaway tears when a student said, “Thank you, Ms. Waters, for showing that we are smart andwe can make it.”  That’s what good schools can do, and we want good schools all across thecountry.
Let’s also remember that after parents, the biggest impact on a child’s success comes fromthe man or woman at the front of the classroom.  In South Korea, teachers are known as“nation builders.”  Here in America, it’s time we treated the people who educate our childrenwith the same level of respect.  We want to reward good teachers and stop making excusesfor bad ones. And over the next 10 years, with so many baby boomers retiring from ourclassrooms, we want to prepare 100,000 new teachers in the fields of science and technologyand engineering and math.
In fact, to every young person listening tonight who’s contemplating their career choice:  Ifyou want to make a difference in the life of our nation; if you want to make a difference in thelife of a child -- become a teacher.  Your country needs you.
Of course, the education race doesn’t end with a high school diploma.  To compete, highereducation must be within the reach of every American.  That’s why we’ve ended theunwarranted taxpayer subsidies that went to banks, and used the savings to make collegeaffordable for millions of students. And this year, I ask Congress to go further, and makepermanent our tuition tax credit -- worth $10,000 for four years of college.  It’s the right thingto do.
Because people need to be able to train for new jobs and careers in today’s fast-changingeconomy, we’re also revitalizing America’s community colleges.  Last month, I saw thepromise of these schools at Forsyth Tech in North Carolina.  Many of the students there usedto work in the surrounding factories that have since left town.  One mother of two, a womannamed Kathy Proctor, had worked in the furniture industry since she was 18 years old.  Andshe told me she’s earning her degree in biotechnology now, at 55 years old, not just becausethe furniture jobs are gone, but because she wants to inspire her children to pursue theirdreams, too.  As Kathy said, “I hope it tells them to never give up.”
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
If we take these steps -- if we raise expectations for every child, and give them the bestpossible chance at an education, from the day they are born until the last job they take -- wewill reach the goal that I set two years ago:  By the end of the decade, America will onceagain have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
One last point about education.  Today, there are hundreds of thousands of students excellingin our schools who are not American citizens.  Some are the children of undocumentedworkers, who had nothing to do with the actions of their parents. They grew up as Americansand pledge allegiance to our flag, and yet they live every day with the threat of deportation. Others come here from abroad to study in our colleges and universities.  But as soon as theyobtain advanced degrees, we send them back home to compete against us.  It makes nosense.
Now, I strongly believe that we should take on, once and for all, the issue of illegalimmigration.  And I am prepared to work with Republicans and Democrats to protect ourborders, enforce our laws and address the millions of undocumented workers who are nowliving in the shadows.  I know that debate will be difficult.  I know it will take time.  Buttonight, let’s agree to make that effort.  And let’s stop expelling talented, responsible youngpeople who could be staffing our research labs or starting a new business, who could befurther enriching this nation.
The third step in winning the future is rebuilding America.  To attract new businesses to ourshores, we need the fastest, most reliable ways to move people, goods, and information --from high-speed rail to high-speed Internet.
Our infrastructure used to be the best, but our lead has slipped.  South Korean homes nowhave greater Internet access than we do.  Countries in Europe and Russia invest more in theirroads and railways than we do.  China is building faster trains and newer airports.  Meanwhile,when our own engineers graded our nation’s infrastructure, they gave us a “D.”
We have to do better.  America is the nation that built the transcontinental railroad, broughtelectricity to rural communities, constructed the Interstate Highway System.  The jobs createdby these projects didn’t just come from laying down track or pavement.  They came frombusinesses that opened near a town’s new train station or the new off-ramp.
So over the last two years, we’ve begun rebuilding for the 21st century, a project that hasmeant thousands of good jobs for the hard-hit construction industry.  And tonight, I’mproposing that we redouble those efforts.
We’ll put more Americans to work repairing crumbling roads and bridges.  We’ll make surethis is fully paid for, attract private investment, and pick projects based [on] what’s best forthe economy, not politicians.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
Within 25 years, our goal is to give 80 percent of Americans access to high-speed rail.  Thiscould allow you to go places in half the time it takes to travel by car.  For some trips, it will befaster than flying -- without the pat-down.  As we speak, routes in California and the Midwestare already underway.
Within the next five years, we’ll make it possible for businesses to deploy the next generationof high-speed wireless coverage to 98 percent of all Americans.  This isn’t just about -- thisisn’t about faster Internet or fewer dropped calls.  It’s about connecting every part of Americato the digital age.  It’s about a rural community in Iowa or Alabama where farmers and smallbusiness owners will be able to sell their products all over the world.  It’s about a firefighterwho can download the design of a burning building onto a handheld device; a student who cantake classes with a digital textbook; or a patient who can have face-to-face video chats withher doctor.
All these investments -- in innovation, education, and infrastructure -- will make America abetter place to do business and create jobs.  But to help our companies compete, we alsohave to knock down barriers that stand in the way of their success.
For example, over the years, a parade of lobbyists has rigged the tax code to benefitparticular companies and industries.  Those with accountants or lawyers to work the systemcan end up paying no taxes at all.  But all the rest are hit with one of the highest corporatetax rates in the world.  It makes no sense, and it has to change.
So tonight, I’m asking Democrats and Republicans to simplify the system.  Get rid of theloopholes.  Level the playing field.  And use the savings to lower the corporate tax rate for thefirst time in 25 years -- without adding to our deficit.  It can be done.
To help businesses sell more products abroad, we set a goal of doubling our exports by 2014 -
- because the more we export, the more jobs we create here at home.  Already, our exportsare up.  Recently, we signed agreements with India and China that will support more than250,000 jobs here in the United States.  And last month, we finalized a trade agreement withSouth Korea that will support at least 70,000 American jobs.  This agreement hasunprecedented support from business and labor, Democrats and Republicans -- and I ask thisCongress to pass it as soon as possible.
Now, before I took office, I made it clear that we would enforce our trade agreements, andthat I would only sign deals that keep faith with American workers and promote Americanjobs.  That’s what we did with Korea, and that’s what I intend to do as we pursue agreementswith Panama and Colombia and continue our Asia Pacific and global trade talks.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
To reduce barriers to growth and investment, I’ve ordered a review of governmentregulations.  When we find rules that put an unnecessary burden on businesses, we will fixthem.  But I will not hesitate to create or enforce common-sense safeguards to protect theAmerican people.  That’s what we’ve done in this country for more than a century.  It’s whyour food is safe to eat, our water is safe to drink, and our air is safe to breathe.  It’s why wehave speed limits and child labor laws.  It’s why last year, we put in place consumerprotections against hidden fees and penalties by credit card companies and new rules toprevent another financial crisis. And it’s why we passed reform that finally prevents the healthinsurance industry from exploiting patients.
Now, I have heard rumors that a few of you still have concerns about our new health carelaw.  So let me be the first to say that anything can be improved.  If you have ideas abouthow to improve this law by making care better or more affordable, I am eager to work withyou.  We can start right now by correcting a flaw in the legislation that has placed anunnecessary bookkeeping burden on small businesses.
What I’m not willing to do -- what I’m not willing to do is go back to the days when insurancecompanies could deny someone coverage because of a preexisting condition.
I’m not willing to tell James Howard, a brain cancer patient from Texas, that his treatmentmight not be covered.  I’m not willing to tell Jim Houser, a small business man from Oregon,that he has to go back to paying $5,000 more to cover his employees.  As we speak, this lawis making prescription drugs cheaper for seniors and giving uninsured students a chance tostay on their patients’ -- parents’ coverage.
So I say to this chamber tonight, instead of re-fighting the battles of the last two years, let’sfix what needs fixing and let’s move forward.
Now, the final critical step in winning the future is to make sure we aren’t buried under amountain of debt.
We are living with a legacy of deficit spending that began almost a decade ago.  And in thewake of the financial crisis, some of that was necessary to keep credit flowing, save jobs, andput money in people’s pockets.
But now that the worst of the recession is over, we have to confront the fact that ourgovernment spends more than it takes in.  That is not sustainable.  Every day, familiessacrifice to live within their means.  They deserve a government that does the same.
So tonight, I am proposing that starting this year, we freeze annual domestic spending for thenext five years. Now, this would reduce the deficit by more than $400 billion over the nextdecade, and will bring discretionary spending to the lowest share of our economy since DwightEisenhower was President.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
This freeze will require painful cuts.  Already, we’ve frozen the salaries of hardworking federalemployees for the next two years.  I’ve proposed cuts to things I care deeply about, likecommunity action programs.  The Secretary of Defense has also agreed to cut tens of billionsof dollars in spending that he and his generals believe our military can do without.
I recognize that some in this chamber have already proposed deeper cuts, and I’m willing toeliminate whatever we can honestly afford to do without.  But let’s make sure that we’re notdoing it on the backs of our most vulnerable citizens.  And let’s make sure that what we’recutting is really excess weight.  Cutting the deficit by gutting our investments in innovationand education is like lightening an overloaded airplane by removing its engine.  It may makeyou feel like you’re flying high at first, but it won’t take long before you feel the impact.
Now, most of the cuts and savings I’ve proposed only address annual domestic spending,which represents a little more than 12 percent of our budget.  To make further progress, wehave to stop pretending that cutting this kind of spending alone will be enough.  It won’t.
The bipartisan fiscal commission I created last year made this crystal clear.  I don’t agree withall their proposals, but they made important progress.  And their conclusion is that the onlyway to tackle our deficit is to cut excessive spending wherever we find it -- in domesticspending, defense spending, health care spending, and spending through tax breaks andloopholes.
This means further reducing health care costs, including programs like Medicare and Medicaid,which are the single biggest contributor to our long-term deficit.  The health insurance law wepassed last year will slow these rising costs, which is part of the reason that nonpartisaneconomists have said that repealing the health care law would add a quarter of a trilliondollars to our deficit.  Still, I’m willing to look at other ideas to bring down costs, including onethat Republicans suggested last year -- medical malpractice reform to rein in frivolouslawsuits.
To put us on solid ground, we should also find a bipartisan solution to strengthen SocialSecurity for future generations.  We must do it without putting at risk current retirees, themost vulnerable, or people with disabilities; without slashing benefits for future generations;and without subjecting Americans’ guaranteed retirement income to the whims of the stockmarket.
And if we truly care about our deficit, we simply can’t afford a permanent extension of the taxcuts for the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans.  Before we take money away from our schoolsor scholarships away from our students, we should ask millionaires to give up their tax break. It’s not a matter of punishing their success.  It’s about promoting America’s success.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
In fact, the best thing we could do on taxes for all Americans is to simplify the individual taxcode.  This will be a tough job, but members of both parties have expressed an interest indoing this, and I am prepared to join them.
So now is the time to act.  Now is the time for both sides and both houses of Congress --Democrats and Republicans -- to forge a principled compromise that gets the job done.  If wemake the hard choices now to rein in our deficits, we can make the investments we need towin the future.
Let me take this one step further.  We shouldn’t just give our people a government that’smore affordable.  We should give them a government that’s more competent and moreefficient.  We can’t win the future with a government of the past.
We live and do business in the Information Age, but the last major reorganization of thegovernment happened in the age of black-and-white TV.  There are 12 different agencies thatdeal with exports.  There are at least five different agencies that deal with housing policy. Then there’s my favorite example:  The Interior Department is in charge of salmon whilethey’re in fresh water, but the Commerce Department handles them when they’re insaltwater. I hear it gets even more complicated once they’re smoked.
Now, we’ve made great strides over the last two years in using technology and getting rid ofwaste.  Veterans can now download their electronic medical records with a click of themouse.  We’re selling acres of federal office space that hasn’t been used in years, and we’llcut through red tape to get rid of more.  But we need to think bigger.  In the coming months,my administration will develop a proposal to merge, consolidate, and reorganize the federalgovernment in a way that best serves the goal of a more competitive America.  I will submitthat proposal to Congress for a vote -- and we will push to get it passed.
In the coming year, we’ll also work to rebuild people’s faith in the institution of government. Because you deserve to know exactly how and where your tax dollars are being spent, you’llbe able to go to a website and get that information for the very first time in history.  Becauseyou deserve to know when your elected officials are meeting with lobbyists, I ask Congress todo what the White House has already done -- put that information online.  And because theAmerican people deserve to know that special interests aren’t larding up legislation with petprojects, both parties in Congress should know this:  If a bill comes to my desk with earmarksinside, I will veto it.  I will veto it. 
The 21st century government that’s open and competent.  A government that lives within itsmeans.  An economy that’s driven by new skills and new ideas.  Our success in this new andchanging world will require reform, responsibility, and innovation.  It will also require us toapproach that world with a new level of engagement in our foreign affairs.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
Just as jobs and businesses can now race across borders, so can new threats and newchallenges.  No single wall separates East and West.  No one rival superpower is alignedagainst us.
And so we must defeat determined enemies, wherever they are, and build coalitions that cutacross lines of region and race and religion.  And America’s moral example must always shinefor all who yearn for freedom and justice and dignity.  And because we’ve begun this work,tonight we can say that American leadership has been renewed and America’s standing hasbeen restored.
Look to Iraq, where nearly 100,000 of our brave men and women have left with their headsheld high. American combat patrols have ended, violence is down, and a new government hasbeen formed.  This year, our civilians will forge a lasting partnership with the Iraqi people,while we finish the job of bringing our troops out of Iraq.  America’s commitment has beenkept.  The Iraq war is coming to an end.
Of course, as we speak, al Qaeda and their affiliates continue to plan attacks against us. Thanks to our intelligence and law enforcement professionals, we’re disrupting plots andsecuring our cities and skies.  And as extremists try to inspire acts of violence within ourborders, we are responding with the strength of our communities, with respect for the rule oflaw, and with the conviction that American Muslims are a part of our American family.
We’ve also taken the fight to al Qaeda and their allies abroad.  In Afghanistan, our troopshave taken Taliban strongholds and trained Afghan security forces.  Our purpose is clear:  Bypreventing the Taliban from reestablishing a stranglehold over the Afghan people, we willdeny al Qaeda the safe haven that served as a launching pad for 9/11.
Thanks to our heroic troops and civilians, fewer Afghans are under the control of theinsurgency.  There will be tough fighting ahead, and the Afghan government will need todeliver better governance.  But we are strengthening the capacity of the Afghan people andbuilding an enduring partnership with them.  This year, we will work with nearly 50 countriesto begin a transition to an Afghan lead.  And this July, we will begin to bring our troops home.
In Pakistan, al Qaeda’s leadership is under more pressure than at any point since 2001.  Theirleaders and operatives are being removed from the battlefield.  Their safe havens areshrinking.  And we’ve sent a message from the Afghan border to the Arabian Peninsula to allparts of the globe:  We will not relent, we will not waver, and we will defeat you.
American leadership can also be seen in the effort to secure the worst weapons of war. Because Republicans and Democrats approved the New START treaty, far fewer nuclearweapons and launchers will be deployed.  Because we rallied the world, nuclear materials arebeing locked down on every continent so they never fall into the hands of terrorists.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
Because of a diplomatic effort to insist that Iran meet its obligations, the Iranian governmentnow faces tougher sanctions, tighter sanctions than ever before.  And on the KoreanPeninsula, we stand with our ally South Korea, and insist that North Korea keeps itscommitment to abandon nuclear weapons.
This is just a part of how we’re shaping a world that favors peace and prosperity.  With ourEuropean allies, we revitalized NATO and increased our cooperation on everything fromcounterterrorism to missile defense.  We’ve reset our relationship with Russia, strengthenedAsian alliances, built new partnerships with nations like India.
This March, I will travel to Brazil, Chile, and El Salvador to forge new alliances across theAmericas.  Around the globe, we’re standing with those who take responsibility -- helpingfarmers grow more food, supporting doctors who care for the sick, and combating thecorruption that can rot a society and rob people of opportunity.
Recent events have shown us that what sets us apart must not just be our power -- it mustalso be the purpose behind it.  In south Sudan -- with our assistance -- the people were finallyable to vote for independence after years of war.  Thousands lined up before dawn.  Peopledanced in the streets.  One man who lost four of his brothers at war summed up the scenearound him:  “This was a battlefield for most of my life,” he said.  “Now we want to be free.” 
And we saw that same desire to be free in Tunisia, where the will of the people proved morepowerful than the writ of a dictator.  And tonight, let us be clear:  The United States ofAmerica stands with the people of Tunisia, and supports the democratic aspirations of allpeople.
We must never forget that the things we’ve struggled for, and fought for, live in the hearts ofpeople everywhere.  And we must always remember that the Americans who have borne thegreatest burden in this struggle are the men and women who serve our country.
Tonight, let us speak with one voice in reaffirming that our nation is united in support of ourtroops and their families.  Let us serve them as well as they’ve served us -- by giving themthe equipment they need, by providing them with the care and benefits that they haveearned, and by enlisting our veterans in the great task of building our own nation.
Our troops come from every corner of this country -- they’re black, white, Latino, Asian,Native American.  They are Christian and Hindu, Jewish and Muslim.  And, yes, we know thatsome of them are gay.  Starting this year, no American will be forbidden from serving thecountry they love because of who they love.  And with that change, I call on all our collegecampuses to open their doors to our military recruiters and ROTC.  It is time to leave behindthe divisive battles of the past.  It is time to move forward as one nation.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
We should have no illusions about the work ahead of us. Reforming our schools, changing theway we use energy, reducing our deficit -- none of this will be easy.  All of it will take time. And it will be harder because we will argue about everything.  The costs.  The details.  Theletter of every law.
Of course, some countries don’t have this problem.  If the central government wants arailroad, they build a railroad, no matter how many homes get bulldozed.  If they don’t want abad story in the newspaper, it doesn’t get written.
And yet, as contentious and frustrating and messy as our democracy can sometimes be, Iknow there isn’t a person here who would trade places with any other nation on Earth.
We may have differences in policy, but we all believe in the rights enshrined in ourConstitution.  We may have different opinions, but we believe in the same promise that saysthis is a place where you can make it if you try.  We may have different backgrounds, but webelieve in the same dream that says this is a country where anything is possible.  No matterwho you are.  No matter where you come from.
That dream is why I can stand here before you tonight.  That dream is why a working-classkid from Scranton can sit behind me. That dream is why someone who began by sweeping thefloors of his father’s Cincinnati bar can preside as Speaker of the House in the greatest nationon Earth.
That dream -- that American Dream -- is what drove the Allen Brothers to reinvent theirroofing company for a new era.  It’s what drove those students at Forsyth Tech to learn a newskill and work towards the future.  And that dream is the story of a small business ownernamed Brandon Fisher.
Brandon started a company in Berlin, Pennsylvania, that specializes in a new kind of drillingtechnology.  And one day last summer, he saw the news that halfway across the world, 33men were trapped in a Chilean mine, and no one knew how to save them.
But Brandon thought his company could help.  And so he designed a rescue that would cometo be known as Plan B.  His employees worked around the clock to manufacture the necessarydrilling equipment.  And Brandon left for Chile.
Along with others, he began drilling a 2,000-foot hole into the ground, working three- or four-
hour -- three or four days at a time without any sleep.  Thirty-seven days later, Plan Bsucceeded, and the miners were rescued.  But because he didn’t want all of the attention,Brandon wasn’t there when the miners emerged.  He’d already gone back home, back to workon his next project.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
  
And later, one of his employees said of the rescue, “We proved that Center Rock is a littlecompany, but we do big things.”
We do big things.
From the earliest days of our founding, America has been the story of ordinary people whodare to dream.  That’s how we win the future.
We’re a nation that says, “I might not have a lot of money, but I have this great idea for anew company.”  “I might not come from a family of college graduates, but I will be the first toget my degree.”  “I might not know those people in trouble, but I think I can help them, and Ineed to try.”  “I’m not sure how we’ll reach that better place beyond the horizon, but I knowwe’ll get there.  I know we will.”
We do big things.
The idea of America endures.  Our destiny remains our choice.  And tonight, more than twocenturies later, it’s because of our people that our future is hopeful, our journey goes forward,and the state of our union is strong.
Thank you.  God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.
Property of   Copyright ©2012. All rights reserved.
