A few months ago, in response to too many tragedies -- including the shootings of a UnitedStates Congresswoman, Gabby Giffords, who’s here today, and the murder of 20 innocentschoolchildren and their teachers -- this country took up the cause of protecting more of ourpeople from gun violence.
Families that know unspeakable grief summoned the courage to petition their elected leaders-- not just to honor the memory of their children, but to protect the lives of all our children. And a few minutes ago, a minority in the United States Senate decided it wasn’t worth it. They blocked common-sense gun reforms even while these families looked on from theSenate gallery.
By now, it’s well known that 90 percent of the American people support universal backgroundchecks that make it harder for a dangerous person to buy a gun.  We’re talking aboutconvicted felons, people convicted of domestic violence, people with a severe mental illness. Ninety percent of Americans support that idea.  Most Americans think that's already the law.
And a few minutes ago, 90 percent of Democrats in the Senate just voted for that idea.  Butit’s not going to happen because 90 percent of Republicans in the Senate just voted againstthat idea.
  
A majority of senators voted "yes" to protecting more of our citizens with smarter backgroundchecks.  But by this continuing distortion of Senate rules, a minority was able to block it frommoving forward.
I’m going to speak plainly and honestly about what’s happened here because the Americanpeople are trying to figure out how can something have 90 percent support and yet nothappen. We had a Democrat and a Republican -- both gun owners, both fierce defenders ofour Second Amendment, with “A” grades from the NRA -- come together and worked togetherto write a common-sense compromise on background checks.  And I want to thank JoeManchin and Pat Toomey for their courage in doing that.  That was not easy given theirtraditional strong support for Second Amendment rights.
As they said, nobody could honestly claim that the package they put together infringed on ourSecond Amendment rights.  All it did was extend the same background check rules thatalready apply to guns purchased from a dealer to guns purchased at gun shows or over theInternet.  So 60 percent of guns are already purchased through a background check system;this would have covered a lot of the guns that are currently outside that system.
Their legislation showed respect for gun owners, and it showed respect for the victims of gunviolence.  And Gabby Giffords, by the way, is both -- she’s a gun owner and a victim of gunviolence.  She is a Westerner and a moderate.  And she supports these background checks.
In fact, even the NRA used to support expanded background checks.  The current leader ofthe NRA used to support these background checks.  So while this compromise didn’t containeverything I wanted or everything that these families wanted, it did represent progress.  Itrepresented moderation and common sense.  That’s why 90 percent of the American peoplesupported it.
But instead of supporting this compromise, the gun lobby and its allies willfully lied about thebill.  They claimed that it would create some sort of "big brother" gun registry, even thoughthe bill did the opposite.  This legislation, in fact, outlawed any registry.  Plain and simple,right there in the text.  But that didn’t matter.
And unfortunately, this pattern of spreading untruths about this legislation served a purpose,because those lies upset an intense minority of gun owners, and that in turn intimidated a lotof senators.  And I talked to several of these senators over the past few weeks, and they’re allgood people.  I know all of them were shocked by tragedies like Newtown.  And I alsounderstand that they come from states that are strongly pro-gun. And I have consistently saidthat there are regional differences when it comes to guns, and that both sides have to listento each other.
But the fact is most of these senators could not offer any good reason why we wouldn’t wantto make it harder for criminals and those with severe mental illnesses to buy a gun.  Therewere no coherent arguments as to why we wouldn’t do this.
  
It came down to politics -- the worry that that vocal minority of gun owners would come afterthem in future elections.  They worried that the gun lobby would spend a lot of money andpaint them as anti-Second Amendment.
And obviously, a lot of Republicans had that fear, but Democrats had that fear, too.  And sothey caved to the pressure, and they started looking for an excuse -- any excuse -- to vote"no."
One common argument I heard was that this legislation wouldn’t prevent all futuremassacres.  And that’s true.  As I said from the start, no single piece of legislation can stopevery act of violence and evil.  We learned that tragically just two days ago.  But if action byCongress could have saved one person, one child, a few hundred, a few thousand -- if it couldhave prevented those people from losing their lives to gun violence in the future whilepreserving our Second Amendment rights, we had an obligation to try.
And this legislation met that test.  And too many senators failed theirs.
I've heard some say that blocking this step would be a victory.  And my question is, a victoryfor who?  A victory for what?  All that happened today was the preservation of the loopholethat lets dangerous criminals buy guns without a background check.  That didn’t make ourkids safer.  Victory for not doing something that 90 percent of Americans, 80 percent ofRepublicans, the vast majority of your constituents wanted to get done?  It begs the question,who are we here to represent?
I've heard folks say that having the families of victims lobby for this legislation was somehowmisplaced.  "A prop," somebody called them.  "Emotional blackmail," some outlet said.  Arethey serious?  Do we really think that thousands of families whose lives have been shatteredby gun violence don’t have a right to weigh in on this issue?  Do we think their emotions, theirloss is not relevant to this debate?
So all in all, this was a pretty shameful day for Washington.
But this effort is not over.  I want to make it clear to the American people we can still bringabout meaningful changes that reduce gun violence, so long as the American people don’tgive up on it.  Even without Congress, my administration will keep doing everything it can toprotect more of our communities.  We’re going to address the barriers that prevent statesfrom participating in the existing background check system.  We’re going to give lawenforcement more information about lost and stolen guns so it can do its job.  We’re going tohelp to put in place emergency plans to protect our children in their schools.
But we can do more if Congress gets its act together.  And if this Congress refuses to listen tothe American people and pass common-sense gun legislation, then the real impact is going tohave to come from the voters.
  
To all the people who supported this legislation -- law enforcement and responsible gunowners, Democrats and Republicans, urban moms, rural hunters, whoever you are -- youneed to let your representatives in Congress know that you are disappointed, and that if theydon’t act this time, you will remember come election time.
To the wide majority of NRA households who supported this legislation, you need to let yourleadership and lobbyists in Washington know they didn’t represent your views on this one.
The point is those who care deeply about preventing more and more gun violence will have tobe as passionate, and as organized, and as vocal as those who blocked these common-sensesteps to help keep our kids safe.  Ultimately, you outnumber those who argued the otherway.  But they're better organized.  They're better financed.  They’ve been at it longer.  Andthey make sure to stay focused on this one issue during election time. And that's the reasonwhy you can have something that 90 percent of Americans support and you can't get itthrough the Senate or the House of Representatives.
So to change Washington, you, the American people, are going to have to sustain somepassion about this.  And when necessary, you’ve got to send the right people to Washington. And that requires strength, and it requires persistence.
And that's the one thing that these families should have inspired in all of us.  I still don't knowhow they have been able to muster up the strength to do what they’ve doing over the lastseveral weeks, last several months.
And I see this as just round one.  When Newtown happened, I met with these families and Ispoke to the community, and I said, something must be different right now.  We’re going tohave to change.  That's what the whole country said.  Everybody talked about how we weregoing to change something to make sure this didn't happen again, just like everybody talkedabout how we needed to do something after Aurora.  Everybody talked about we neededchange something after Tucson.
And I’m assuming that the emotions that we’ve all felt since Newtown, the emotions thatwe’ve all felt since Tucson and Aurora and Chicago -- the pain we share with these familiesand families all across the country who’ve lost a loved one to gun violence -- I’m assumingthat's not a temporary thing.  I’m assuming our expressions of grief and our commitment todo something different to prevent these things from happening are not empty words.
I believe we’re going to be able to get this done.  Sooner or later, we are going to get thisright.  The memories of these children demand it.  And so do the American people.
Thank you very much, everybody.
