I thank His Excellency, the Secretary-General, for his statement.  I'll now make a statement inmy capacity as President of the United States.
Mr. Secretary-General, heads of state and government distinguished representatives, thankyou for being here today. 
In the nearly 70 years of the United Nations, this is only the sixth time that the SecurityCouncil has met at a level like this.  We convene such sessions to address the most urgentthreats to peace and security.  And I called this meeting because we must come together -- asnations and an international community -- to confront the real and growing threat of foreignterrorist fighters.   
As I said earlier today, 1 the tactic of terrorism is not new. So many nations represented heretoday, including my own, have seen our citizens killed by terrorists who target innocents.  Andtoday, the people of the world have been horrified by another brutal murder, of HerveGourdel, by terrorists in Algeria.  President Hollande, we stand with you and the French peoplenot only as you grieve this terrible loss, but as you show resolve against terror and in defenseof liberty.
  
What brings us together today, what is new is the unprecedented flow of fighters in recentyears to and from conflict zones, including Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa, Yemen, Libya,and most recently, Syria and Iraq.
Our intelligence agencies estimate that more than 15,000 foreign fighters from more than 80nations have traveled to Syria in recent years.  Many have joined terrorist organizations suchas al Qaeda’s affiliate, the Nusrah Front, and ISIL, which now threatens people across Syriaand Iraq.  And I want to acknowledge and thank Prime Minister Abadi of Iraq for being heretoday. 
In the Middle East and elsewhere, these terrorists exacerbate conflicts; they pose animmediate threat to people in these regions; and as we’ve already seen in several cases, theymay try to return to their home countries to carry out deadly attacks.  In the face of thisthreat, many of our nations -- working together and through the United Nations -- haveincreased our cooperation.  Around the world, foreign terrorist fighters have been arrested,plots have been disrupted and lives have been saved. 
Earlier this year at West Point, I called for a new Partnership to help nations build theircapacity to meet the evolving threat of terrorism, including foreign terrorist fighters.  Andpreventing these individuals from reaching Syria and then slipping back across our borders isa critical element of our strategy to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
The historic resolution that we just adopted enshrines our commitment to meet thischallenge.  It is legally binding.  It establishes new obligations that nations must meet. Specifically, nations are required to “prevent and suppress the recruiting, organizing,transporting or equipping” of foreign terrorist fighters, as well as the financing of their travelor activities.  Nations must “prevent the movement of terrorists or terrorist groups” throughtheir territory, and ensure that their domestic laws allow for the prosecution of those whoattempt to do so.
The resolution we passed today calls on nations to help build the capacity of states on thefront lines of this fight -- including with the best practices that many of our nations approvedyesterday, and which the United States will work to advance through our CounterterrorismPartnerships Fund.  This resolution will strengthen cooperation between nations, includingsharing more information about the travel and activities of foreign terrorist fighters.  And itmakes clear that respecting human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law is notoptional -- it is an essential part of successful counterterrorism efforts.  Indeed, historyteaches us that the failure to uphold these rights and freedoms can actually fuel violentextremism.
Finally, this resolution recognizes that there is no military solution to the problem ofmisguided individuals seeking to join terrorist organizations, and it, therefore, calls on nationsto work together to counter the violent extremism that can radicalize, recruit, and mobilizeindividuals to engage in terrorism.
  
Potential recruits must hear the words of former terrorist fighters who have seen the truth --that groups like ISIL betray Islam by killing innocent men, women and children, the majorityof whom are Muslim. 
Often it is local communities -- family, friends, neighbors, and faith leaders -- that are bestable to identify and help disillusioned individuals before they succumb to extremist ideologiesand engage in violence.  That’s why the United States government is committed to workingwith communities in America and around the world to build partnerships of trust, respect andcooperation. 
Likewise, even as we are unrelenting against terrorists who threaten our people, we mustredouble our work to address the conditions -- the repression, the lack of opportunity, toooften the hopelessness that can make some individuals more susceptible to appeals toextremism and violence.  And this includes continuing to pursue a political solution in Syriathat allows all Syrians to live in security, dignity, and peace. 
This is the work that we must do as nations.  These are the partnerships we must forge as aninternational community.  And these are the standards that we now must meet.  Yet even aswe’re guided by the commitments that we make here today, let me close by stating theobvious.  Resolutions alone will not be enough.  Promises on paper cannot keep us safe.  Loftyrhetoric and good intentions will not stop a single terrorist attack.
The words spoken here today must be matched and translated into action, into deeds --concrete action, within nations and between them, not just in the days ahead, but for years tocome. For if there was ever a challenge in our interconnected world that cannot be met by anyone nation alone, it is this:  terrorists crossing borders and threatening to unleashunspeakable violence.  These terrorists believe our countries will be unable to stop them.  Thesafety of our citizens demand that we do.  And I’m here today to say that all of you who arecommitted to this urgent work will find a strong and steady partner in the United States ofAmerica. 
I now would like to resume my function as President of the Council.  And I will now give thefloor to the other members of the Security Council.
1 Earlier in the day, President Obama addressed the 69th meeting of the United Nations General Assembly. In that address he stated: “Terrorism is not new.  Speaking before this Assembly, President Kennedy put it well:  'Terror is not a new weapon,' he said.  'Throughouthistory it has been used by those who could not prevail, either by persuasion or example.'  In the 20th century, terror was used by all manner ofgroups who failed to come to power through public support.  But in this century, we have faced a more lethal and ideological brand of terroristswho have perverted one of the world’s great religions.  With access to technology that allows small groups to do great harm, they haveembraced a nightmarish vision that would divide the world into adherents and infidels -- killing as many innocent civilians as possible, employingthe most brutal methods to intimidate people within their communities."
