Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, fellow delegates, ladies and gentlemen: It is a great honor for me tobe here today. I would like to talk to you about a subject that is at the heart of the United Nations -- thepursuit of peace in an imperfect world. War and conflict have been with us since the beginning of civilizations. But in the first part of the 20thcentury, the advance of modern weaponry led to death on a staggering scale. It was this killing thatcompelled the founders of this body to build an institution that was focused not just on ending one war, buton averting others; a union of sovereign states that would seek to prevent conflict, while also addressing itscauses. No American did more to pursue this objective than President Franklin Roosevelt. He knew that a victory inwar was not enough. As he said at one of the very first meetings on the founding of the United Nations, “Wehave got to make, not merely peace, but a peace that will last.” The men and women who built this institution understood that peace is more than just the absence of war. Alasting peace -- for nations and for individuals -- depends on a sense of justice and opportunity, of dignityand freedom. It depends on struggle and sacrifice, on compromise, and on a sense of common humanity. One delegate to the San Francisco Conference that led to the creation of the United Nations put it well:“Many people,” she said, “have talked as if all that has to be done to get peace was to say loudly andfrequently that we loved peace and we hated war. Now we have learned that no matter how much we lovepeace and hate war, we cannot avoid having war brought upon us if there are convulsions in other parts ofthe world.” The fact is peace is hard. But our people demand it. Over nearly seven decades, even as the UnitedNations helped avert a third world war, we still live in a world scarred by conflict and plagued by poverty.
  
Even as we proclaim our love for peace and our hatred of war, there are still convulsions in our world thatendanger us all. I took office at a time of two wars for the United States. Moreover, the violent extremists who drew us intowar in the first place -- Osama bin Laden, and his al Qaeda organization -- remained at large. Today, we'veset a new direction. At the end of this year, America’s military operation in Iraq will be over. We will have a normal relationshipwith a sovereign nation that is a member of the community of nations. That equal partnership will bestrengthened by our support for Iraq -- for its government and for its security forces, for its people and fortheir aspirations. As we end the war in Iraq, the United States and our coalition partners have begun a transition inAfghanistan. Between now and 2014, an increasingly capable Afghan government and security forces willstep forward to take responsibility for the future of their country. As they do, we are drawing down our ownforces, while building an enduring partnership with the Afghan people. So let there be no doubt: The tide of war is receding. When I took office, roughly 180,000 Americans wereserving in Iraq and Afghanistan. By the end of this year, that number will be cut in half, and it will continue todecline. This is critical for the sovereignty of Iraq and Afghanistan. It’s also critical to the strength of theUnited States as we build our nation at home.
Moreover, we are poised to end these wars from a position of strength. Ten years ago, there was an openwound and twisted steel, a broken heart in the center of this city. Today, as a new tower is rising at GroundZero, it symbolizes New York’s renewal, even as al Qaeda is under more pressure than ever before. Itsleadership has been degraded. And Osama bin Laden, a man who murdered thousands of people fromdozens of countries, will never endanger the peace of the world again. So, yes, this has been a difficult decade. But today, we stand at a crossroads of history with the chance tomove decisively in the direction of peace. To do so, we must return to the wisdom of those who created thisinstitution. The United Nations’ Founding Charter calls upon us, “to unite our strength to maintaininternational peace and security.” And Article 1 of this General Assembly’s Universal Declaration of HumanRights reminds us that, “All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and in rights.” Those bedrockbeliefs -- in the responsibility of states, and the rights of men and women -- must be our guide. And in that effort, we have reason to hope. This year has been a time of extraordinary transformation. Morenations have stepped forward to maintain international peace and security. And more individuals areclaiming their universal right to live in freedom and dignity. Think about it: One year ago, when we met here in New York, the prospect of a successful referendum inSouth Sudan was in doubt. But the international community overcame old divisions to support theagreement that had been negotiated to give South Sudan self-determination. And last summer, as a newflag went up in Juba, former soldiers laid down their arms, men and women wept with joy, and childrenfinally knew the promise of looking to a future that they will shape. 
  
One year ago, the people of Côte D’Ivoire approached a landmark election. And when the incumbent lost,and refused to respect the results, the world refused to look the other way. U.N. peacekeepers wereharassed, but they did not leave their posts. The Security Council, led by the United States and Nigeria andFrance, came together to support the will of the people. And Côte D’Ivoire is now governed by the man whowas elected to lead.
One year ago, the hopes of the people of Tunisia were suppressed. But they chose the dignity of peacefulprotest over the rule of an iron fist. A vendor lit a spark that took his own life, but he ignited a movement. Ina face of a crackdown, students spelled out the word, "freedom." The balance of fear shifted from the rulerto those that he ruled. And now the people of Tunisia are preparing for elections that will move them onestep closer to the democracy that they deserve. One year ago, Egypt had known one President for nearly 30 years. But for 18 days, the eyes of the worldwere glued to Tahrir Square, where Egyptians from all walks of life -- men and women, young and old,Muslim and Christian -- demanded their universal rights. We saw in those protesters the moral force of non-
violence that has lit the world from Delhi to Warsaw, from Selma to South Africa -- and we knew that changehad come to Egypt and to the Arab world.
One year ago, the people of Libya were ruled by the world’s longest-serving dictator. But faced with bulletsand bombs and a dictator who threatened to hunt them down like rats, they showed relentless bravery. Wewill never forget the words of the Libyan who stood up in those early days of the revolution and said, “Ourwords are free now.” It’s a feeling you can’t explain. Day after day, in the face of bullets and bombs, theLibyan people refused to give back that freedom. And when they were threatened by the kind of massatrocity that often went unchallenged in the last century, the United Nations lived up to its charter. TheSecurity Council authorized all necessary measures to prevent a massacre. The Arab League called for thiseffort; Arab nations joined a NATO-led coalition that halted Qaddafi’s forces in their tracks.
In the months that followed, the will of the coalition proved unbreakable, and the will of the Libyan peoplecould not be denied. Forty-two years of tyranny was ended in six months. From Tripoli to Misurata toBenghazi -- today, Libya is free. Yesterday, the leaders of a new Libya took their rightful place beside us,and this week, the United States is reopening our embassy in Tripoli.
This is how the international community is supposed to work -- nations standing together for the sake ofpeace and security, and individuals claiming their rights. Now, all of us have a responsibility to support thenew Libya -- the new Libyan government as they confront the challenge of turning this moment of promiseinto a just and lasting peace for all Libyans. So this has been a remarkable year. The Qaddafi regime is over. Gbagbo, Ben Ali, Mubarak are no longerin power. Osama bin Laden is gone, and the idea that change could only come through violence has beenburied with him. Something is happening in our world. The way things have been is not the way that they willbe. The humiliating grip of corruption and tyranny is being pried open. Dictators are on notice. Technology isputting power into the hands of the people. The youth are delivering a powerful rebuke to dictatorship, andrejecting the lie that some races, some peoples, some religions, some ethnicities do not desire democracy.The promise written down on paper -- “all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights” -- iscloser at hand. 
  
But let us remember: Peace is hard. Peace is hard. Progress can be reversed. Prosperity comes slowly.Societies can split apart. The measure of our success must be whether people can live in sustainedfreedom, dignity, and security. And the United Nations and its member states must do their part to supportthose basic aspirations. And we have more work to do. In Iran, we've seen a government that refuses to recognize the rights of its own people. As we meet heretoday, men and women and children are being tortured, detained and murdered by the Syrian regime.Thousands have been killed, many during the holy time of Ramadan. Thousands more have poured acrossSyria’s borders. The Syrian people have shown dignity and courage in their pursuit of justice -- protestingpeacefully, standing silently in the streets, dying for the same values that this institution is supposed to standfor. And the question for us is clear: Will we stand with the Syrian people, or with their oppressors? Already, the United States has imposed strong sanctions on Syria’s leaders. We supported a transfer ofpower that is responsive to the Syrian people. And many of our allies have joined in this effort. But for thesake of Syria -- and the peace and security of the world -- we must speak with one voice. There's no excusefor inaction. Now is the time for the United Nations Security Council to sanction the Syrian regime, and tostand with the Syrian people. Throughout the region, we will have to respond to the calls for change. In Yemen, men, women and childrengather by the thousands in towns and city squares every day with the hope that their determination andspilled blood will prevail over a corrupt system. America supports those aspirations. We must work withYemen’s neighbors and our partners around the world to seek a path that allows for a peaceful transition ofpower from President Saleh, and a movement to free and fair elections as soon as possible.
In Bahrain, steps have been taken toward reform and accountability. We’re pleased with that, but more isrequired. America is a close friend of Bahrain, and we will continue to call on the government and the mainopposition bloc -- the Wifaq -- to pursue a meaningful dialogue that brings peaceful change that isresponsive to the people. We believe the patriotism that binds Bahrainis together must be more powerfulthan the sectarian forces that would tear them apart. It will be hard, but it is possible. We believe that each nation must chart its own course to fulfill the aspirations of its people, and Americadoes not expect to agree with every party or person who expresses themselves politically. But we willalways stand up for the universal rights that were embraced by this Assembly. Those rights depend onelections that are free and fair; on governance that is transparent and accountable; respect for the rights ofwomen and minorities; justice that is equal and fair. That is what our people deserve. Those are theelements of peace that can last. Moreover, the United States will continue to support those nations that transition to democracy -- withgreater trade and investment -- so that freedom is followed by opportunity. We will pursue a deeperengagement with governments, but also with civil society -- students and entrepreneurs, political parties andthe press. We have banned those who abuse human rights from traveling to our country. And we’vesanctioned those who trample on human rights abroad. And we will always serve as a voice for thosewho've been silenced.
Now, I know, particularly this week, that for many in this hall, there's one issue that stands as a test forthese principles and a test for American foreign policy, and that is the conflict between the Israelis and thePalestinians.
  
One year ago, I stood at this podium and I called for an independent Palestine. I believed then, and I believenow, that the Palestinian people deserve a state of their own. But what I also said is that a genuine peacecan only be realized between the Israelis and the Palestinians themselves. One year later, despite extensiveefforts by America and others, the parties have not bridged their differences. Faced with this stalemate, I putforward a new basis for negotiations in May of this year. That basis is clear. It’s well known to all of us here.Israelis must know that any agreement provides assurances for their security. Palestinians deserve to knowthe territorial basis of their state. Now, I know that many are frustrated by the lack of progress. I assure you, so am I. But the question isn’tthe goal that we seek -- the question is how do we reach that goal. And I am convinced that there is no shortcut to the end of a conflict that has endured for decades. Peace is hard work. Peace will not come throughstatements and resolutions at the United Nations -- if it were that easy, it would have been accomplished bynow. Ultimately, it is the Israelis and the Palestinians who must live side by side. Ultimately, it is the Israelisand the Palestinians -- not us -- who must reach agreement on the issues that divide them: on borders andon security, on refugees and Jerusalem. Ultimately, peace depends upon compromise among people who must live together long after our speechesare over, long after our votes have been tallied. That’s the lesson of Northern Ireland, where ancientantagonists bridged their differences. That’s the lesson of Sudan, where a negotiated settlement led to anindependent state. And that is and will be the path to a Palestinian state -- negotiations between the parties. We seek a future where Palestinians live in a sovereign state of their own, with no limit to what they canachieve. There’s no question that the Palestinians have seen that vision delayed for too long. It is preciselybecause we believe so strongly in the aspirations of the Palestinian people that America has invested somuch time and so much effort in the building of a Palestinian state, and the negotiations that can deliver aPalestinian state. But understand this as well: America’s commitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable. Our friendship withIsrael is deep and enduring. And so we believe that any lasting peace must acknowledge the very realsecurity concerns that Israel faces every single day.
Let us be honest with ourselves: Israel is surrounded by neighbors that have waged repeated wars againstit. Israel’s citizens have been killed by rockets fired at their houses and suicide bombs on their buses.Israel’s children come of age knowing that throughout the region, other children are taught to hate them.Israel, a small country of less than eight million people, look out at a world where leaders of much largernations threaten to wipe it off of the map. The Jewish people carry the burden of centuries of exile andpersecution, and fresh memories of knowing that six million people were killed simply because of who theyare. Those are facts. They cannot be denied.
The Jewish people have forged a successful state in their historic homeland. Israel deserves recognition. Itdeserves normal relations with its neighbors. And friends of the Palestinians do them no favors by ignoringthis truth, just as friends of Israel must recognize the need to pursue a two-state solution with a secure Israelnext to an independent Palestine. That is the truth -- each side has legitimate aspirations -- and that’s part of what makes peace so hard. Andthe deadlock will only be broken when each side learns to stand in the other’s shoes; each side can see theworld through the other’s eyes. That’s what we should be encouraging. That’s what we should be promoting.
  
This body -- founded, as it was, out of the ashes of war and genocide, dedicated, as it is, to the dignity ofevery single person -- must recognize the reality that is lived by both the Palestinians and the Israelis. Themeasure of our actions must always be whether they advance the right of Israeli and Palestinian children tolive lives of peace and security and dignity and opportunity. And we will only succeed in that effort if we canencourage the parties to sit down, to listen to each other, and to understand each other’s hopes and eachother’s fears. That is the project to which America is committed. There are no shortcuts. And that is what theUnited Nations should be focused on in the weeks and months to come.
Now, even as we confront these challenges of conflict and revolution, we must also recognize -- we mustalso remind ourselves -- that peace is not just the absence of war. True peace depends on creating theopportunity that makes life worth living. And to do that, we must confront the common enemies of humanity:nuclear weapons and poverty, ignorance and disease. These forces corrode the possibility of lasting peaceand together we're called upon to confront them.
To lift the specter of mass destruction, we must come together to pursue the peace and security of a worldwithout nuclear weapons. Over the last two years, we've begun to walk down that path. Since our NuclearSecurity Summit in Washington, nearly 50 nations have taken steps to secure nuclear materials fromterrorists and smugglers. Next March, a summit in Seoul will advance our efforts to lock down all of them.The New START Treaty between the United States and Russia will cut our deployed arsenals to the lowestlevel in half a century, and our nations are pursuing talks on how to achieve even deeper reductions.America will continue to work for a ban on the testing of nuclear weapons and the production of fissilematerial needed to make them.
And so we have begun to move in the right direction. And the United States is committed to meeting ourobligations. But even as we meet our obligations, we’ve strengthened the treaties and institutions that helpstop the spread of these weapons. And to do so, we must continue to hold accountable those nations thatflout them.
The Iranian government cannot demonstrate that its program is peaceful. It has not met its obligations and itrejects offers that would provide it with peaceful nuclear power. North Korea has yet to take concrete stepstowards abandoning its weapons and continues belligerent action against the South. There's a future ofgreater opportunity for the people of these nations if their governments meet their international obligations.But if they continue down a path that is outside international law, they must be met with greater pressureand isolation. That is what our commitment to peace and security demands.
To bring prosperity to our people, we must promote the growth that creates opportunity. In this effort, let usnot forget that we’ve made enormous progress over the last several decades. Closed societies gave way toopen markets. Innovation and entrepreneurship has transformed the way we live and the things that we do.Emerging economies from Asia to the Americas have lifted hundreds of millions of people from poverty. It’san extraordinary achievement. And yet, three years ago, we were confronted with the worst financial crisis ineight decades. And that crisis proved a fact that has become clearer with each passing year -- our fates areinterconnected. In a global economy, nations will rise, or fall, together.
  
And today, we confront the challenges that have followed on the heels of that crisis. Around the worldrecovery is still fragile. Markets remain volatile. Too many people are out of work. Too many others arestruggling just to get by. We acted together to avert a depression in 2009. We must take urgent andcoordinated action once more. Here in the United States, I've announced a plan to put Americans back towork and jumpstart our economy, at the same time as I’m committed to substantially reducing our deficitsover time.
We stand with our European allies as they reshape their institutions and address their own fiscal challenges.For other countries, leaders face a different challenge as they shift their economy towards more self-
reliance, boosting domestic demand while slowing inflation. So we will work with emerging economies thathave rebounded strongly, so that rising standards of living create new markets that promote global growth.That’s what our commitment to prosperity demands.
To combat the poverty that punishes our children, we must act on the belief that freedom from want is abasic human right. The United States has made it a focus of our engagement abroad to help people to feedthemselves. And today, as drought and conflict have brought famine to the Horn of Africa, our consciencecalls on us to act. Together, we must continue to provide assistance, and support organizations that canreach those in need. And together, we must insist on unrestricted humanitarian access so that we can savethe lives of thousands of men and women and children. Our common humanity is at stake. Let us show thatthe life of a child in Somalia is as precious as any other. That is what our commitment to our fellow humanbeings demand.
To stop disease that spreads across borders, we must strengthen our system of public health. We willcontinue the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. We will focus on the health of mothers and ofchildren. And we must come together to prevent, and detect, and fight every kind of biological danger --whether it’s a pandemic like H1N1, or a terrorist threat, or a treatable disease.
This week, America signed an agreement with the World Health Organization to affirm our commitment tomeet this challenge. And today, I urge all nations to join us in meeting the HWO’s [sic] goal of making sureall nations have core capacities to address public health emergencies in place by 2012. That is what ourcommitment to the health of our people demands.
To preserve our planet, we must not put off action that climate change demands. We have to tap the powerof science to save those resources that are scarce. And together, we must continue our work to build on theprogress made in Copenhagen and Cancun, so that all the major economies here today follow through onthe commitments that were made. Together, we must work to transform the energy that powers oureconomies, and support others as they move down that path. That is what our commitment to the nextgeneration demands.
And to make sure our societies reach their potential, we must allow our citizens to reach theirs. No countrycan afford the corruption that plagues the world like a cancer. Together, we must harness the power of opensocieties and open economies. That’s why we’ve partnered with countries from across the globe to launch anew partnership on open government that helps ensure accountability and helps to empower citizens. Nocountry should deny people their rights to freedom of speech and freedom of religion, but also no countryshould deny people their rights because of who they love, which is why we must stand up for the rights ofgays and lesbians everywhere.
  
And no country can realize its potential if half its population cannot reach theirs. This week, the UnitedStates signed a new Declaration on Women’s Participation. Next year, we should each announce the stepswe are taking to break down the economic and political barriers that stand in the way of women and girls.This is what our commitment to human progress demands. I know there’s no straight line to that progress, no single path to success. We come from different cultures,and carry with us different histories. But let us never forget that even as we gather here as heads of differentgovernments, we represent citizens who share the same basic aspirations -- to live with dignity andfreedom; to get an education and pursue opportunity; to love our families, and love and worship our God; tolive in the kind of peace that makes life worth living.
It is the nature of our imperfect world that we are forced to learn these lessons over and over again. Conflictand repression will endure so long as some people refuse to do unto others as we would have them do untous. Yet that is precisely why we have built institutions like this -- to bind our fates together, to help usrecognize ourselves in each other -- because those who came before us believed that peace is preferable towar, and freedom is preferable to suppression, and prosperity is preferable to poverty. That’s the messagethat comes not from capitals, but from citizens, from our people.
And when the cornerstone of this very building was put in place, President Truman came here to New Yorkand said, “The United Nations is essentially an expression of the moral nature of man’s aspirations.” Themoral nature of man’s aspirations. As we live in a world that is changing at a breathtaking pace, that’s alesson that we must never forget.
Peace is hard, but we know that it is possible. So, together, let us be resolved to see that it is defined by ourhopes and not by our fears. Together, let us make peace, but a peace, most importantly, that will last.
Thank you very much.
