Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you so much.  Please, please, have a seat.  Thankyou. 
What a singular honor it is for me to be here today.  I want to thank, first and foremost, theJohnson family for giving us this opportunity and the graciousness with which Michelle and Ihave been received. 
We came down a little bit late because we were upstairs looking at some of the exhibits andsome of the private offices that were used by President Johnson and Mrs. Johnson.  AndMichelle was in particular interested to -- of a recording in which Lady Bird is critiquingPresident Johnson’s performance.  And she said, come, come, you need to listen to this.  Andshe pressed the button and nodded her head.  Some things do not change -- even 50 yearslater.
To all the members of Congress, the warriors for justice, the elected officials and communityleaders who are here today -- I want to thank you.
Four days into his sudden presidency -- and the night before he would address a joint sessionof the Congress in which he once served -- Lyndon Johnson sat around a table with his closestadvisors, preparing his remarks to a shattered and grieving nation.
  
He wanted to call on senators and representatives to pass a civil rights bill -- the mostsweeping since Reconstruction.  And most of his staff counseled him against it.  They said itwas hopeless; that it would anger powerful Southern Democrats and committee chairmen;that it risked derailing the rest of his domestic agenda.  And one particularly bold aide said hedid not believe a President should spend his time and power on lost causes, however worthythey might be.  To which, it is said, President Johnson replied, “Well, what the hell’s thepresidency for?”1  What the hell’s the presidency for if not to fight for causes you believe in?
Today, as we commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act, we honor the menand women who made it possible.  Some of them are here today.  We celebrate giants likeJohn Lewis and Andrew Young and Julian Bond.  We recall the countless unheraldedAmericans, black and white, students and scholars, preachers and housekeepers -- whosenames are etched not on monuments, but in the hearts of their loved ones, and in the fabricof the country they helped to change. 
But we also gather here, deep in the heart of the state that shaped him, to recall one giantman’s remarkable efforts to make real the promise of our founding:  “We hold these truths tobe self-evident, that all men are created equal.”
Those of us who have had the singular privilege to hold the office of the Presidency know wellthat progress in this country can be hard and it can be slow, frustrating and sometimes you’restymied.  The office humbles you.  You’re reminded daily that in this great democracy, you arebut a relay swimmer in the currents of history, bound by decisions made by those who camebefore, reliant on the efforts of those who will follow to fully vindicate your vision.
But the presidency also affords a unique opportunity to bend those currents -- by shaping ourlaws and by shaping our debates; by working within the confines of the world as it is, but alsoby reimagining the world as it should be.
This was President Johnson’s genius.  As a master of politics and the legislative process, hegrasped like few others the power of government to bring about change. 
LBJ was nothing if not a realist.  He was well aware that the law alone isn’t enough to changehearts and minds.  A full century after Lincoln’s time, he said, 
Until justice is blind to color, until education is unaware of race, until opportunity isunconcerned with the color of men’s skins, emancipation will be a proclamation but nota fact.2
He understood laws couldn’t accomplish everything.  But he also knew that only the law couldanchor change, and set hearts and minds on a different course.  And a lot of Americansneeded the law’s most basic protections at that time.
  
As Dr. King said at the time, 
It may be true that the law can’t make a man love me but it can keep him fromlynching me, and I think that’s pretty important.3
And passing laws was what LBJ knew how to do.  No one knew politics and no one lovedlegislating more than President Johnson.  He was charming when he needed to be, ruthlesswhen required.  He could wear you down with logic and argument.  He could horse trade, andhe could flatter. You come with me on this bill,” he would reportedly tell a key Republicanleader from my home state during the fight for the Civil Rights Bill, “and 200 years from now,schoolchildren will know only two names: Abraham Lincoln and Everett Dirksen! And he knewthat senators would believe things like that.
President Johnson liked power.  He liked the feel of it, the wielding of it.  But that hunger washarnessed and redeemed by a deeper understanding of the human condition; by a sympathyfor the underdog, for the downtrodden, for the outcast.  And it was a sympathy rooted in hisown experience.
As a young boy growing up in the Texas Hill Country, Johnson knew what being poor felt like. “Poverty was so common,” he would later say, “we didn’t even know it had a name.”  Thefamily home didn’t have electricity or indoor plumbing.  Everybody worked hard, including thechildren.  President Johnson had known the metallic taste of hunger; the feel of a mother’scalloused hands, rubbed raw from washing and cleaning and holding a household together. His cousin Ava remembered sweltering days spent on her hands and knees in the cottonfields, with Lyndon whispering beside her, “Boy, there’s got to be a better way to make aliving than this.  There’s got to be a better way.”4
It wasn’t until years later when he was teaching at a so-called Mexican school in a tiny town inTexas that he came to understand how much worse the persistent pain of poverty could be forother races in a Jim Crow South.  Oftentimes his students would show up to class hungry. And when he’d visit their homes, he’d meet fathers who were paid slave wages by the farmersthey worked for.  Those children were taught, he would later say, “that the end of life is in abeet row, a spinach field, or a cotton patch.” 
Deprivation and discrimination -- these were not abstractions to Lyndon Baines Johnson.  Heknew that poverty and injustice are as inseparable as opportunity and justice are joined.  Sothat was in him from an early age.
Now, like any of us, he was not a perfect man.  His experiences in rural Texas may havestretched his moral imagination, but he was ambitious, very ambitious, a young man in ahurry to plot his own escape from poverty and to chart his own political career.  And in theJim Crow South, that meant not challenging convention.
  
During his first 20 years in Congress, he opposed every civil rights bill that came up for avote, once calling the push for federal legislation “a farce and a sham.”  He was chosen as avice presidential nominee in part because of his affinity with, and ability to deliver, thatSouthern white vote.  And at the beginning of the Kennedy administration, he shared withPresident Kennedy a caution towards racial controversy. 
But marchers kept marching.  Four little girls were killed in a church.  Bloody Sundayhappened.  The winds of change blew.  And when the time came, when LBJ stood in the OvalOffice -- I picture him standing there, taking up the entire doorframe, looking out over theSouth Lawn in a quiet moment -- and asked himself what the true purpose of his office wasfor, what was the endpoint of his ambitions, he would reach back in his own memory and he’dremember his own experience with want. 
And he knew that he had a unique capacity, as the most powerful white politician from theSouth, to not merely challenge the convention that had crushed the dreams of so many, butto ultimately dismantle for good the structures of legal segregation.  He’s the only guy whocould do it -- and he knew there would be a cost, famously saying the Democratic Party may“have lost the South for a generation.”5 
That’s what his presidency was for.  That’s where he meets his moment.  And possessed withan iron will, possessed with those skills that he had honed so many years in Congress, pushedand supported by a movement of those willing to sacrifice everything for their own liberation,President Johnson fought for and argued and horse traded and bullied and persuaded untilultimately he signed the Civil Rights Act into law. 
And he didn’t stop there -- even though his advisors again told him to wait, again told him letthe dust settle, let the country absorb this momentous decision.  He shook them off.  “Themeat in the coconut,” as President Johnson would put it, was the Voting Rights Act, so hefought for and passed that as well.  Immigration reform came shortly after.  And then, a FairHousing Act.  And then, a health care law that opponents described as “socialized medicine”that would curtail America’s freedom, but ultimately freed millions of seniors from the fearthat illness could rob them of dignity and security in their golden years, which we now knowtoday as Medicare.
What President Johnson understood was that equality required more than the absence ofoppression.  It required the presence of economic opportunity.  He wouldn’t be as eloquent asDr. King would be in describing that linkage, as Dr. King moved into mobilizing sanitationworkers and a poor people’s movement, but he understood that connection because he hadlived it.  A decent job, decent wages, health care -- those, too, were civil rights worth fightingfor.  An economy where hard work is rewarded and success is shared, that was his goal.  Andhe knew, as someone who had seen the New Deal transform the landscape of his Texaschildhood, who had seen the difference electricity had made because of the Tennessee ValleyAuthority, the transformation concretely day in and day out in the life of his own family, he
  
understood that government had a role to play in broadening prosperity to all those whowould strive for it.
“We want to open the gates to opportunity,” President Johnson said, “But we are also going togive all our people, black and white, the help they need to walk through those gates.”6
Now, if some of this sounds familiar, it’s because today we remain locked in this same greatdebate about equality and opportunity, and the role of government in ensuring each.  As wastrue 50 years ago, there are those who dismiss the Great Society as a failed experiment andan encroachment on liberty; who argue that government has become the true source of allthat ails us, and that poverty is due to the moral failings of those who suffer from it.  Thereare also those who argue, John, that nothing has changed; that racism is so embedded in ourDNA that there is no use trying politics -- the game is rigged. 
But such theories ignore history.  Yes, it’s true that, despite laws like the Civil Rights Act, andthe Voting Rights Act and Medicare, our society is still racked with division and poverty.  Yes,race still colors our political debates, and there have been government programs that havefallen short.  In a time when cynicism is too often passed off as wisdom, it’s perhaps easy toconclude that there are limits to change; that we are trapped by our own history; and politicsis a fool’s errand, and we’d be better off if we roll back big chunks of LBJ’s legacy, or at least ifwe don’t put too much of our hope, invest too much of our hope in our government.
I reject such thinking.  Not just because Medicare and Medicaid have lifted millions fromsuffering; not just because the poverty rate in this nation would be far worse without foodstamps and Head Start and all the Great Society programs that survive to this day.  I rejectsuch cynicism because I have lived out the promise of LBJ’s efforts.  Because Michelle haslived out the legacy of those efforts.  Because my daughters have lived out the legacy of thoseefforts.  Because I and millions of my generation were in a position to take the baton that hehanded to us.
Because of the Civil Rights movement, because of the laws President Johnson signed, newdoors of opportunity and education swung open for everybody -- not all at once, but theyswung open.  Not just blacks and whites, but also women and Latinos; and Asians and NativeAmericans; and gay Americans and Americans with a disability.  They swung open for you,and they swung open for me.  And that’s why I’m standing here today -- because of thoseefforts, because of that legacy.
And that means we’ve got a debt to pay.  That means we can’t afford to be cynical.  Half acentury later, the laws LBJ passed are now as fundamental to our conception of ourselves andour democracy as the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.  They are foundational; an essentialpiece of the American character. 
  
But we are here today because we know we cannot be complacent.  For history travels notonly forwards; history can travel backwards, history can travel sideways.  And securing thegains this country has made requires the vigilance of its citizens.  Our rights, our freedoms --they are not given.  They must be won.  They must be nurtured through struggle anddiscipline, and persistence and faith. 
And one concern I have sometimes during these moments, the celebration of the signing ofthe Civil Rights Act, the March on Washington -- from a distance, sometimes thesecommemorations seem inevitable, they seem easy.  All the pain and difficulty and struggleand doubt -- all that is rubbed away.  And we look at ourselves and we say, oh, things arejust too different now;  we couldn’t possibly do what was done then -- these giants, what theyaccomplished.  And yet, they were men and women, too.  It wasn’t easy then.  It wasn’tcertain then. 
Still, the story of America is a story of progress.  However slow, however incomplete, howeverharshly challenged at each point on our journey, however flawed our leaders, however manytimes we have to take a quarter of a loaf or half a loaf -- the story of America is a story ofprogress.  And that’s true because of men like President Lyndon Baines Johnson.
In so many ways, he embodied America, with all our gifts and all our flaws, in all ourrestlessness and all our big dreams.  This man -- born into poverty, weaned in a world full ofracial hatred -- somehow found within himself the ability to connect his experience with thebrown child in a small Texas town; the white child in Appalachia; the black child in Watts.  Aspowerful as he became in that Oval Office, he understood them.  He understood what it meantto be on the outside.  And he believed that their plight was his plight too; that his freedomultimately was wrapped up in theirs; and that making their lives better was what the hell thepresidency was for.
And those children were on his mind when he strode to the podium that night in the HouseChamber, when he called for the vote on the Civil Rights law.  “It never occurred to me,” hesaid, “in my fondest dreams that I might have the chance to help the sons and daughters ofthose students” that he had taught so many years ago, “and to help people like them all overthis country.  But now I do have that chance.  And I’ll let you in on a secret -- I mean to useit.  And I hope that you will use it with me.”7
That was LBJ’s greatness.  That’s why we remember him.  And if there is one thing that heand this year’s anniversary should teach us, if there’s one lesson I hope that Malia and Sashaand young people everywhere learn from this day, it’s that with enough effort, and enoughempathy, and enough perseverance, and enough courage, people who love their country canchange it.
In his final year, President Johnson stood on this stage, racked with pain, battered by thecontroversies of Vietnam, looking far older than his 64 years, and he delivered what would behis final public speech. 
  
“We have proved that great progress is possible,” he said.  “We know how much still remainsto be done.  And if our efforts continue, and if our will is strong, and if our hearts are right,and if courage remains our constant companion, then, my fellow Americans, I am confident,we shall overcome.”
We shall overcome.  We, the citizens of the United States.  Like Dr. King, like AbrahamLincoln, like countless citizens who have driven this country inexorably forward, PresidentJohnson knew that ours in the end is a story of optimism, a story of achievement and constantstriving that is unique upon this Earth.  He knew because he had lived that story.  He believedthat together we can build an America that is more fair, more equal, and more free than theone we inherited.  He believed we make our own destiny.  And in part because of him, wemust believe it as well.
Thank you.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.
1 Quotation Source: Caro, Robert A. The years of Lyndon Johnson: The passage of power. Vol. 4. Random House, 2012.
2 Quotation Source: Johnson, L.B. Memorial Day Address. 30 May 1963.
3 Quotation Source: King, M.L. Ohio Northern University Address 11 January 1968.
4 Quotation Source: Caro, R. A. (2002). The years of Lyndon Johnson: Master of the senate (Vol. 3) p.718. Alfred a Knopf Incorporated.
5 Statement unconfirmed
6 Quotation Source: Johnson, L.B. Joint Session of Congress Address. 15 March 1965.
7 Quotation Source: Johnson, L.B. Joint Session of Congress Address. 15 March 1965.
