Hello, George Mason! How’s everybody doing today? Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. 
AUDIENCE: Yes we can! Yes we can! Yes we can! Yes we can!
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, everybody. It’s good to be back with some real Patriots. I want to thank Dr.Alan Merten, the President of George Mason University, and his family. Dr. Shirley Travis, who’s here --thank you. And Coach Larranaga, we were just talking a little bit about -- looking forward to picking GeorgeMason in my bracket next year.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: We love you!
THE PRESIDENT: I love you! I don’t know if some of you remember, but I visited this university about threeyears ago for the first time. This was at just the dawn of my presidential campaign. It was about three weeksold, I think. We didn’t have a lot of money. We didn’t have a lot of staff. Nobody could pronounce my name.Our poll numbers were quite low. And a lot of people -- a lot of people in Washington, they didn’t think it waseven worth us trying.
AUDIENCE MEMBER: Yes we can!
THE PRESIDENT: They had counted us out before we had even started, because the Washingtonconventional wisdom was that change was too hard. But what we had even then was a group of studentshere at George Mason -- who believed that if we worked hard enough and if we fought long enough, if weorganized enough supporters, then we could finally bring change to that city across the river. We believedthat despite all the resistance, we could make Washington work. Not for the lobbyists, not for the specialinterests, not for the politicians, but for the American people.
  
And now three years later, I stand before you, one year after the worst recession since the GreatDepression, having to make a bunch of tough decisions, having had a tumultuous debate, having had a lotof folks who were skeptical that we could get anything done. And right now, we are at the point where weare going to do something historic this weekend. That’s what this health care vote is all about.
AUDIENCE: Yes we can! Yes we can! Yes we can!
THE PRESIDENT: A few miles from here, Congress is in the final stages of a fateful debate about the futureof health insurance in America. It’s a debate that’s raged not just for the past year but for the past century.One thing when you’re in the White House, you’ve got a lot of history books around you. And so I’ve beenreading up on the history here. Teddy Roosevelt, Republican, was the first to advocate that everybody gethealth care in this country. Every decade since, we’ve had Presidents, Republicans and Democrats, fromHarry Truman to Richard Nixon to JFK to Lyndon Johnson to -- every single President has said we need tofix this system. It’s a debate that’s not only about the cost of health care, not just about what we’re doingabout folks who aren’t getting a fair shake from their insurance companies. It’s a debate about the characterof our country-- about whether we can still meet the challenges of our time; whether we still have the gutsand the courage to give every citizen, not just some, the chance to reach their dreams.
At the heart of this debate is the question of whether we’re going to accept a system that works better forthe insurance companies than it does for the American people -- because if this vote fails, the insuranceindustry will continue to run amok. They will continue to deny people coverage. They will continue to denypeople care. They will continue to jack up premiums 40 or 50 or 60 percent as they have in the last fewweeks without any accountability whatsoever. They know this. And that’s why their lobbyists are stalking thehalls of Congress as we speak, and pouring millions of dollars into negative ads. And that’s why they aredoing everything they can to kill this bill. 
So the only question left is this: Are we going to let the special interests win once again?
AUDIENCE: No!
THE PRESIDENT: Or are we going to make this vote a victory for the American people? 
AUDIENCE: Yes we can! Yes we can!
THE PRESIDENT: George Mason, the time for reform is right now. Not a year from now, not five years fromnow, not 10 years from now, not 20 years from now -- it’s now. We have had -- we have had a year of harddebate. Every proposal has been put on the table. Every argument has been made. We have incorporatedthe best ideas from Democrats and from Republicans into a final proposal that builds on the system ofprivate insurance that we currently have. The insurance industry and its supporters in Congress have triedto portray this as radical change.
Now, I just -- I just want to be clear, everybody. Listen up, because we have heard every crazy thing aboutthis bill. You remember. First we heard this was a government takeover of health care. Then we heard thatthis was going to kill granny. Then we heard, well, illegal immigrants are going to be getting the mainbenefits of this bill. There has been -- they have thrown every argument at this legislative effort.
  
But when it -- it turns out, at the end of the day, what we’re talking about is common-sense reform. That’s allwe’re talking about. 
If you like your doctor, you’re going to be able to keep your doctor. If you like your plan, keep your plan. Idon’t believe we should give government or the insurance companies more control over health care inAmerica. I think it’s time to give you, the American people, more control over your health.
And since you’ve been hearing a whole bunch of nonsense, let’s just be clear on what exactly the proposalthat they’re going to vote on in a couple of days will do. It’s going to -- it’s going to change health care inthree ways. Number one, we are going to end the worst practices of insurance companies. This is -- this is apatient’s bill of rights on steroids. Starting this year, thousands of uninsured Americans with preexistingconditions will be able to purchase health insurance, some for the very first time. Starting this year,insurance companies will be banned forever from denying coverage to children with preexisting conditions.Starting this year, insurance companies will be banned from dropping your coverage when you get sick. Andthey’ve been spending a lot of time weeding out people who are sick so they don’t have to pay benefits thatpeople have already paid for. Those practices will end.
If this reform becomes law, all new insurance plans will be required to offer free preventive care to theircustomers. If you buy a new plan, there won’t be lifetime or restrictive annual limits on the amount of careyou receive from your insurance companies. And by the way, to all the young people here today, startingthis year if you don’t have insurance, all new plans will allow you to stay on your parents’ plan until you are26 years old.
So you’ll have some security when you graduate. If that first job doesn’t offer coverage, you’re going toknow that you’ve got coverage. Because as you start your lives and your careers, the last thing you shouldbe worried about is whether you’re going to go broke or make your parents broke just because you get sick.All right?
So that’s the first thing this legislation does -- the toughest insurance reforms in history. And by the way,when you talk to Republicans and you say, well, are you against this? A lot of them will say, no, no, thatpart’s okay. All right, so let’s go to the second part.
The second thing that would change about the current system is that for the first time, small businessowners and people who are being priced out of the insurance market will have the same kind of choice ofprivate health insurance that members of Congress give to themselves.
So what this means is, is that small business owners and middle-class families, they’re going to be able tobe part of what’s called a big pool of customers that can negotiate with the insurance companies. And thatmeans they can purchase more affordable coverage in a competitive marketplace. So they’re not out thereon their own just shopping. They’re part of millions of people who are shopping together. And if you still can’tafford the insurance in this new marketplace, even though it’s going to be cheaper than what you can get onyour own, then we’re going to offer you tax credits to help you afford it -- tax credits that add up to thelargest middle-class tax cut for health care in American history. 
  
Now, these tax credits cost money. Helping folks who can’t afford it right now, that does cost some money. Itcosts about $100 billion per year. But most of the cost --
AUDIENCE MEMBER: That’s all right.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, here’s the reason it’s all right. Here’s the reason it’s all right. It wouldn’t be all rightif we weren’t paying for it -- and by the way, that's what a previous Congress did with the prescription drugplan. All they did was they gave the benefits and they didn’t pay for it. 
That's not what we’re doing. What we’re doing is we’re taking money that America is already spending in thehealth care system, but is being spent poorly, that's going to waste and fraud and unwarranted subsidies forthe insurance companies, and we’re taking that money and making sure those dollars go towards makinginsurance more affordable. 
So we’re going to eliminate wasteful taxpayer subsidies to insurance companies. We’re going to set a newfee on insurance companies that stand to gain millions of new customers.  So here’s the point: Thisproposal is paid for. Unlike some of these previous schemes in Washington, we’re not taking out the creditcard in your name, young people, and charging it to you. We’re making sure this thing is paid for. All right,so that's the second thing.
Now, the third thing that this legislation does is it brings down the cost of health care for families andbusinesses and the federal government. Americans who are buying comparable coverage in the individualmarket would end up seeing their premiums go down 14 to 20 percent. Americans who get their insurancethrough the workplace, cost savings could be as much as $3,000 less per employer than if we do nothing.Now, think about that. That’s $3,000 your employer doesn’t have to pay, which means maybe she can affordto give you a raise.
And by the way, if you’re curious, well, how exactly are we saving these costs? Well, part of it is, again,we’re not spending our health care money wisely. So, for example, you go to the hospital or you go to adoctor and you may take five tests, when it turns out if you just took one test, then you send an e-mailaround with the test results, you wouldn’t be paying $500 per test. So we’re trying to save money across thesystem. And altogether, our cost-cutting measures would reduce most people’s premiums. And here’s thebonus: It brings down our deficit by more than $1 trillion over the next two decades.
So you’ve got -- you’ve got a whole bunch of opponents of this bill saying, well, we can’t afford this; we’refiscal conservatives. These are the same guys who passed that prescription drug bill without paying for it,adding over $1 trillion to our deficit -- “Oh, we can’t afford this.” But this bill, according to the CongressionalBudget Office -- which is the referee, the scorekeeper for how much things cost -- says we’ll save us $1trillion. Not only can we afford to do this, we can’t afford not to do this. 
So here’s the bottom line. That’s our proposal: toughest insurance reforms in history, one of the biggestdeficit-reduction plans in history, and the opportunity to give millions of people -- some of them in your ownfamily, some of the people who are in this auditorium today -- an opportunity for the first time in a very longtime to get affordable health care. That’s it. That’s what we’re trying to do. That’s what the Congress of theUnited States is about to vote on this weekend. 
  
Now, it would be nice if we were just kind of examining the substance, we were walking through the detailsof the plan, what it means for you. But that’s not what the cable stations like to talk about. What they like totalk about is the politics of the vote. What does this mean in November? What does it mean to the pollnumbers? Is this more of an advantage for Democrats or Republicans? What’s it going to mean for Obama?Will his presidency be crippled, or will he be the comeback kid? That’s what they like to talk about. That’swhat they like to talk about. I understand.
One of the things you realize is basically that a lot of reporting in Washington, it’s just like SportsCenter. It’sconsidered a sport, and who’s up and who’s down, and everybody’s keeping score. And you got the teamsgoing at it. It’s Rock ‘Em Sock ‘Em Robots.
Look, let me say this, George Mason: I don’t know how this plays politically. Nobody really does. I mean,there’s been so much misinformation and so much confusion and the climate at times during the course ofthis year has been so toxic and people are so anxious because the economy has been going through sucha tough time. I don’t know what’s going to happen with the politics on this thing. I don’t know whether my pollnumbers go down, they go up. I don’t know what happens in terms of Democrats versus Republicans. 
But here’s what I do know. I do know that this bill, this legislation, is going to be enormously important forAmerica’s future. I do know the impact it will have on the millions of Americans who need our help, and themillions more who may not need help right now but a year from now or five years from now or 10 years fromnow, if they have some bad luck; if, heaven forbid, they get sick; if they’ve got a preexisting condition; if theirchild has a preexisting condition; if they lose their job; if they want to start a company -- I know the impact itwill have on them.
I know what this reform will mean for people like Leslie Banks, a single mom I met in Pennsylvania. She’strying to put her daughter through college, just like probably some of your moms and dads are trying to putyou through college. And her insurance company just sent her a letter saying they plan to double herpremium this year -– have it go up 100 percent. And she can’t afford it. So now she’s trying to figure out, amI going to keep my insurance or am I going to keep my daughter in college? Leslie Banks needs us to passthis reform bill.
I know what reform will mean for people like Laura Klitzka. I met Laura up in Green Bay, Wisconsin, while Iwas campaigning. She thought she had beaten her breast cancer. Then she discovered it had spread to herbones. And she and her insurance -- she and her husband, they were lucky enough to have insurance, buttheir medical bills still landed them in debt. So now she’s spending time worrying about the debt when allshe wants to do is think about how she can spend time with her two kids. Laura needs us to pass this reformbill.
I know what reform will mean for people like Natoma Canfield. When her insurance company raised herrates, she had to give up her coverage, even though she had been paying thousands of dollars in premiumsfor years, because she had beaten cancer 11 years earlier. They kept on jacking up her rates, jacking upher rates. Finally she thought she was going to lose her home. She was scared that a sudden illness wouldlead to financial ruin, but she had no choice. Right now she’s lying in a hospital bed, faced with paying forsuch an illness, after she had to give up her health insurance. She’s praying that somehow she can afford toget well. She knows that it is time for reform. 
  
So George Mason, when you hear people saying, well, why don't we do this more incrementally, why don'twe do this a little more piecemeal, why don't we just help the folks that are easiest to help -- my answer isthe time for reform is now. We have waited long enough. We have waited long enough. 
And in just a few days, a century-long struggle will culminate in a historic vote. We’ve had historic votesbefore. We had a historic vote to put Social Security in place to make sure that our elderly did not live outtheir golden years in poverty. We had a historic vote in civil rights to make sure that everybody was equalunder the law.  As messy as this process is, as frustrating as this process is, as ugly as this process can be,when we have faced such decisions in our past, this nation, time and time again, has chosen to extend itspromise to more of its people.
You know, the naysayers said that Social Security would lead to socialism. But the men and women ofCongress stood fast and created that program that lifted millions out of poverty.
There were cynics that warned that Medicare would lead to a government takeover of our entire health caresystem, and that it didn’t have much support in the polls. But Democrats and Republicans refused to backdown, and they made sure that our seniors had the health care that they needed and could have somebasic peace of mind.
So previous generations, those who came before us, made the decision that our seniors and our poor,through Medicaid, should not be forced to go without health care just because they couldn’t afford it. Todayit falls to this generation to decide whether we will make that same promise to hardworking middle-classfamilies and small businesses all across America, and to young Americans like yourselves who are juststarting out. 
So here’s my bottom line. I know this has been a difficult journey. I know this will be a tough vote. I knowthat everybody is counting votes right now in Washington. But I also remember a quote I saw on a plaque inthe White House the other day. It’s hanging in the same room where I demanded answers from insuranceexecutives and just received a bunch of excuses. And it was a quote from Teddy Roosevelt, the person whofirst called for health care reform -- that Republican -- all those years ago. And it said, “Aggressively fightingfor the right is the noblest sport the world affords.”
Now, I don’t know how passing health care will play politically -- but I know it’s right. Teddy Roosevelt knewit was right. Harry Truman knew that it was right. Ted Kennedy knew it was right. And if you believe that it’sright, then you've got to help us finish this fight. You've got to stand with me just like you did three years agoand make some phone calls and knock on some doors, talk to your parents, talk to your friends. Do not quit,do not give up, we keep on going.  We are going to get this done. We are going to make history. We aregoing to fix health care in America with your help. 
God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
