Good afternoon, everybody. (This sound system’s really powerful.)  Today, I’d like to updatethe American people on two issues that I’ve been monitoring closely these last several days.
First of all, we continue to make progress in carrying out our targeted military operations inIraq.  Last week, I authorized two limited missions:  protecting our people and facilities insideof Iraq, and a humanitarian operation to help save thousands of Iraqi civilians stranded on amountain.1
A week ago, we assessed that many thousands of Yezidi men, women and children hadabandoned their possessions to take refuge on Mount Sinjar in a desperate attempt to avoidslaughter.  We also knew that ISIL terrorists were killing and enslaving Yezidi civilians in theircustody, and laying siege to the mountain. Without food or water, they faced a terrible choice-- starve on the mountain, or be slaughtered on the ground.  That’s when America came tohelp.
Over the last week, the U.S. military conducted humanitarian air drops every night --delivering more than 114,000 meals and 35,000 gallons of fresh water.  We were joined inthat effort by the United Kingdom, and other allies pledged support. Our military was able tosuccessfully strike ISIL targets around the mountain, which improved conditions for civiliansto evacuate the mountain safely.
  
Yesterday, a small team of Americans -- military and civilian -- completed their review of theconditions on the mountain.  They found that food and water have been reaching those inneed, and that thousands of people have been evacuating safely each and every night.  Thecivilians who remain continue to leave, aided by Kurdish forces and Yezidis who are helping tofacilitate the safe passage of their families.  So the bottom line is, is that the situation on themountain has greatly improved and Americans should be very proud of our efforts.
Because of the skill and professionalism of our military -- and the generosity of our people --we broke the ISIL siege of Mount Sinjar; we helped vulnerable people reach safety; and wehelped save many innocent lives.  Because of these efforts, we do not expect there to be anadditional operation to evacuate people off the mountain, and it’s unlikely that we’re going toneed to continue humanitarian air drops on the mountain.  The majority of the militarypersonnel who conducted the assessment will be leaving Iraq in the coming days.  And I justwant to say that as Commander-in-Chief, I could not be prouder of the men and women ofour military who carried out this humanitarian operation almost flawlessly.  I’m very gratefulto them and I know that those who were trapped on that mountain are extraordinarily gratefulas well.
Now, the situation remains dire for Iraqis subjected to ISIL’s terror throughout the country,and this includes minorities like Yezidis and Iraqi Christians; it also includes Sunnis, Shia andKurds.  We’re going to be working with our international partners to provide humanitarianassistance to those who are suffering in northern Iraq wherever we have capabilities and wecan carry out effective missions like the one we carried out on Mount Sinjar withoutcommitting combat troops on the ground. 
We obviously feel a great urge to provide some humanitarian relief to the situation and I’vebeen very encouraged by the interest of our international partners in helping on these kinds ofefforts as well.  We will continue air strikes to protect our people and facilities in Iraq.  Wehave increased the delivery of military assistance to Iraqi and Kurdish forces fighting ISIL onthe front lines. 
And, perhaps most importantly, we are urging Iraqis to come together to turn the tide againstISIL -- above all, by seizing the enormous opportunity of forming a new, inclusive governmentunder the leadership of Prime Minister-designate Abadi.  I had a chance to speak to PrimeMinister-designate Abadi a few days ago, and he spoke about the need for the kind ofinclusive government -- a government that speaks to all the people of Iraq -- that is neededright now.  He still has a challenging task in putting a government together, but we aremodestly hopeful that the Iraqi government situation is moving in the right direction.
Now, second, I want to address something that’s been in the news over the last couple ofdays and that’s the situation in Ferguson, Missouri.  I know that many Americans have beendeeply disturbed by the images we’ve seen in the heartland of our country, as police haveclashed with people protesting.  Today, I’d like us all to take a step back and think about howwe’re going to be moving forward.
  
This morning, I received a thorough update on the situation from Attorney General EricHolder, who has been following it and been in communication with his team.  I’ve alreadytasked the Department of Justice and the FBI to independently investigate the death ofMichael Brown, along with local officials on the ground. 
The Department of Justice is also consulting with local authorities about ways that they canmaintain public safety without restricting the right of peaceful protest and while avoidingunnecessary escalation.  I made clear to the Attorney General that we should do what isnecessary to help determine exactly what happened, and to see that justice is done.
I also just spoke with Governor Jay Nixon of Missouri.  I expressed my concern over theviolent turn that events have taken on the ground, and underscored that now is the time forall of us to reflect on what’s happened, and to find a way to come together going forward.  Heis going to be traveling to Ferguson.  He is a good man and a fine governor, and I’m confidentthat, working together, he is going to be able to communicate his desire to make sure thatjustice is done and his desire to make sure that public safety is maintained in an appropriateway.
Of course, it’s important to remember how this started.  We lost a young man, Michael Brown,in heartbreaking and tragic circumstances.  He was 18 years old.  His family will never holdMichael in their arms again.  And when something like this happens, the local authorities --including the police -- have a responsibility to be open and transparent about how they areinvestigating that death, and how they are protecting the people in their communities.
There is never an excuse for violence against police, or for those who would use this tragedyas a cover for vandalism or looting.  There’s also no excuse for police to use excessive forceagainst peaceful protests, or to throw protestors in jail for lawfully exercising their FirstAmendment rights.  And here, in the United States of America, police should not be bullyingor arresting journalists who are just trying to do their jobs and report to the American peopleon what they see on the ground.  Put simply, we all need to hold ourselves to a high standard,particularly those of us in positions of authority.
I know that emotions are raw right now in Ferguson and there are certainly passionatedifferences about what has happened.  There are going to be different accounts of how thistragedy occurred.  There are going to be differences in terms of what needs to happen goingforward.  That’s part of our democracy.  But let’s remember that we’re all part of oneAmerican family.  We are united in common values, and that includes belief in equality underthe law; a basic respect for public order and the right to peaceful public protest; a reverencefor the dignity of every single man, woman and child among us; and the need foraccountability when it comes to our government. 
  
So now is the time for healing.  Now is the time for peace and calm on the streets ofFerguson.  Now is the time for an open and transparent process to see that justice is done. And I’ve asked that the Attorney General and the U.S. Attorney on the scene continue to workwith local officials to move that process forward.  They will be reporting to me in the comingdays about what’s being done to make sure that happens. 
Thanks very much, everybody.
1
Reference is to Sinjar or Shengal Mountain, which is, or is part of, a mountainous ridge located near the Yezidi Kurdish city of Sinjar in
Nineveh province, Northwestern Iraq.
