I just concluded a meeting with members of my national security team, including those fromour intelligence, homeland security and law enforcement agencies involved in the securityreviews that I ordered after the failed attack on Christmas Day.     I called these leaders to the White House because we face a challenge of the utmosturgency. As we saw on Christmas, al Qaeda and its extremist allies will stop at nothing in theirefforts to kill Americans.  And we are determined not only to thwart those plans, but todisrupt, dismantle and defeat their networks once and for all.
Indeed, over the past year, we've taken the fight to al Qaeda and its allies wherever they plotand train, be it in Afghanistan and Pakistan, in Yemen and Somalia, or in other countriesaround the world.
Here at home, our intelligence, homeland security and law enforcement agencies have workedtogether with considerable success: gathering intelligence, stitching it together, and makingarrests -- from Denver to Texas, from Illinois to New York -- disrupting plots and savingAmerican lives.  And these successes have not come without a price, as we saw last week inthe loss of our courageous CIA officers in Afghanistan.

But when a suspected terrorist is able to board a plane with explosives on Christmas Day thesystem has failed in a potentially disastrous way.  And it's my responsibility to find out why,and to correct that failure so that we can prevent such attacks in the future.
And that's why, shortly after the attempted bombing over Detroit, I ordered two reviews.  Idirected Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano to review aviation screening,technology and procedures.  She briefed me on her initial findings today, and I'm pleased thatthis review is drawing on the best science and technology, including the expertise of Secretaryof Energy Steven Chu and his department.
I also directed my counterterrorism and homeland security advisor John Brennan to lead athorough review into our terrorist watch-listing system so we can fix what went wrong.  As wediscussed today, this ongoing review continues to reveal more about the human and systemicfailures that almost cost nearly 300 lives.  We will make a summary of this preliminary reportpublic within the next few days, but let me share some of what we know so far.
As I described over the weekend, elements of our intelligence community knew that UmarFarouk Abdulmutallab had traveled to Yemen and joined up with extremists there.  It nowturns out that our intelligence community knew of other red flags -- that al Qaeda in theArabian Peninsula sought to strike not only American targets in Yemen, but the United Statesitself.  And we had information that this group was working with an individual who was known-- who we now know was in fact the individual involved in the Christmas attack.
The bottom line is this:  The U.S. government had sufficient information to have uncoveredthis plot and potentially disrupt the Christmas Day attack.  But our intelligence communityfailed to connect those dots, which would have placed the suspect on the "no fly" list. In otherwords, this was not a failure to collect intelligence; it was a failure to integrate andunderstand the intelligence that we already had.  The information was there.  Agencies andanalysts who needed it had access to it.  And our professionals were trained to look for it andto bring it all together.
Now, I will accept that intelligence, by its nature, is imperfect, but it is increasingly clear thatintelligence was not fully analyzed or fully leveraged.  That's not acceptable, and I will nottolerate it.  Time and again, we've learned that quickly piecing together information andtaking swift action is critical to staying one step ahead of a nimble adversary.
So we have to do better -- and we will do better.  And we have to do it quickly.  Americanlives are on the line.  So I made it clear today to my team:  I want our initial reviewscompleted this week.  I want specific recommendations for corrective actions to fix what wentwrong.  I want those reforms implemented immediately, so that this doesn't happen againand so we can prevent future attacks.  And I know that every member of my team that I metwith today understands the urgency of getting this right.  And I appreciate that each of themtook responsibility for the shortfalls within their own agencies.

Immediately after the attack, I ordered concrete steps to protect the American people:  newscreening and security for all flights, domestic and international; more explosive detectionteams at airports; more air marshals on flights; and deepening cooperation with internationalpartners.
In recent days, we've taken additional steps to improve security.  Counterterrorism officialshave reviewed and updated our terrorist watch list system, including adding more individualsto the "no fly" list.  And while our review has found that our watch-listing system is notbroken, the failure to add Abdulmutallab to the "no fly" list shows that this system needs to bestrengthened.
The State Department is now requiring embassies and consulates to include current visainformation in their warning on individuals with terrorist or suspected terrorist connections. As of yesterday, the Transportation Security Administration, or TSA, is requiring enhancedscreening for passengers flying into the United States from, or flying through, nations on ourlist of state sponsors of terrorism, or other countries of interest.  And in the days ahead, I willannounce further steps to disrupt attacks, including better integration of information andenhanced passenger screening for air travel.
Finally, some have suggested that the events on Christmas Day should cause us to revisit thedecision to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay.  So let me be clear.  It was always our intentto transfer detainees to other countries only under conditions that provide assurances that oursecurity is being protected.
With respect to Yemen in particular, there's an ongoing security situation which we have beenconfronting for some time, along with our Yemeni partner.  Given the unsettled situation, I'vespoken to the Attorney General and we've agreed that we will not be transferring additionaldetainees back to Yemen at this time.
But make no mistake:  We will close Guantanamo prison, which has damaged our nationalsecurity interests and become a tremendous recruiting tool for al Qaeda.  In fact, that was anexplicit rationale for the formation of al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.  And, as I've alwayssaid, we will do so -- we will close the prison in a manner that keeps the American people safeand secure.
Our reviews -- and the steps that we've taken and will continue to take -- go to the heart ofthe kind of intelligence and homeland security we need in the 21st century.  Just as al Qaedaand its allies are constantly evolving and adapting their efforts to strike us, we have toconstantly adapt and evolve to defeat them, because as we saw on Christmas, the margin forerror is slim and the consequences of failure can be catastrophic.

As these violent extremists pursue new havens, we intend to target al Qaeda wherever theytake root, forging new partnerships to deny them sanctuary, as we are doing currently withthe government in Yemen.  As our adversaries seek new recruits, we'll constantly review andrapidly update our intelligence and our institutions.  As they refine our tactics, we'll enhanceour defenses, including smarter screening and security at airports, and investing in thetechnologies that might have detected the kind of explosives used on Christmas.  In short, we need our intelligence, homeland security and law enforcement systems -- and thepeople in them -- to be accountable and to work as intended:  collecting, sharing, integrating,analyzing, and acting on intelligence as quickly and effectively as possible to save innocentlives -- not just most of the time, but all the time.  That's what the American people deserve.
As President, that's exactly what I will demand.
Thank you very much.