To Graça Machel and the Mandela family; to President Zuma and members of thegovernment; to heads of states and government, past and present; distinguished guests -- itis a singular honor to be with you today, to celebrate a life like no other.  To the people ofSouth Africa -- people of every race and walk of life -- the world thanks you for sharing NelsonMandela with us.  His struggle was your struggle.  His triumph was your triumph.  Your dignityand your hope found expression in his life.  And your freedom, your democracy is hischerished legacy.
It is hard to eulogize any man -- to capture in words not just the facts and the dates thatmake a life, but the essential truth of a person -- their private joys and sorrows; the quietmoments and unique qualities that illuminate someone’s soul.  How much harder to do so fora giant of history, who moved a nation toward justice, and in the process moved billionsaround the world.
Born during World War I, far from the corridors of power, a boy raised herding cattle andtutored by the elders of his Thembu tribe, Madiba would emerge as the last great liberator ofthe 20th century.  Like Gandhi, he would lead a resistance movement -- a movement that atits start had little prospect for success.  Like Dr. King, he would give potent voice to the claimsof the oppressed and the moral necessity of racial justice.  He would endure a brutalimprisonment that began in the time of Kennedy and Khrushchev, and reached the final daysof the Cold War.  Emerging from prison, without the force of arms, he would -- like AbrahamLincoln -- hold his country together when it threatened to break apart.  And like America’sFounding Fathers, he would erect a constitutional order to preserve freedom for futuregenerations -- a commitment to democracy and rule of law ratified not only by his election,but by his willingness to step down from power after only one term.
  
Given the sweep of his life, the scope of his accomplishments, the adoration that he so rightlyearned, it’s tempting I think to remember Nelson Mandela as an icon, smiling and serene,detached from the tawdry affairs of lesser men.  But Madiba himself strongly resisted such alifeless portrait.  Instead, Madiba insisted on sharing with us his doubts and his fears; hismiscalculations along with his victories.  "I am not a saint," he said, "unless you think of asaint as a sinner who keeps on trying."
It was precisely because he could admit to imperfection -- because he could be so full of goodhumor, even mischief, despite the heavy burdens he carried -- that we loved him so.  He wasnot a bust made of marble; he was a man of flesh and blood -- a son and a husband, a fatherand a friend.  And that’s why we learned so much from him, and that’s why we can learn fromhim still.  For nothing he achieved was inevitable.  In the arc of his life, we see a man whoearned his place in history through struggle and shrewdness, and persistence and faith.  Hetells us what is possible not just in the pages of history books, but in our own lives as well.
Mandela showed us the power of action; of taking risks on behalf of our ideals.  PerhapsMadiba was right that he inherited, "a proud rebelliousness, a stubborn sense of fairness"from his father.  And we know he shared with millions of black and colored South Africans theanger born of, "a thousand slights, a thousand indignities, a thousand unrememberedmoments…a desire to fight the system that imprisoned my people," he said.
But like other early giants of the ANC -- the Sisulus and Tambos -- Madiba disciplined hisanger and channeled his desire to fight into organization, and platforms, and strategies foraction, so men and women could stand up for their God-given dignity.  Moreover, he acceptedthe consequences of his actions, knowing that standing up to powerful interests and injusticecarries a price:
I have fought against white domination and I have fought against black domination.  I’vecherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together inharmony and [with] equal opportunities.  It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.1
Mandela taught us the power of action, but he also taught us the power of ideas; theimportance of reason and arguments; the need to study not only those who you agree with,but also those who you don’t agree with.  He understood that ideas cannot be contained byprison walls, or extinguished by a sniper’s bullet.  He turned his trial into an indictment ofapartheid because of his eloquence and his passion, but also because of his training as anadvocate.  He used decades in prison to sharpen his arguments, but also to spread his thirstfor knowledge to others in the movement.  And he learned the language and the customs ofhis oppressor so that one day he might better convey to them how their own freedom dependupon his.
  
Mandela demonstrated that action and ideas are not enough.  No matter how right, they mustbe chiseled into law and institutions.  He was practical, testing his beliefs against the hardsurface of circumstance and history.  On core principles he was unyielding, which is why hecould rebuff offers of unconditional release, reminding the Apartheid regime that "prisonerscannot enter into contracts."
But as he showed in painstaking negotiations to transfer power and draft new laws, he wasnot afraid to compromise for the sake of a larger goal.  And because he was not only a leaderof a movement but a skillful politician, the Constitution that emerged was worthy of thismultiracial democracy, true to his vision of laws that protect minority as well as majorityrights, and the precious freedoms of every South African.
And finally, Mandela understood the ties that bind the human spirit.  There is a word in SouthAfrica -- Ubuntu -- a word that captures Mandela’s greatest gift:  his recognition that we areall bound together in ways that are invisible to the eye; that there is a oneness to humanity;that we achieve ourselves by sharing ourselves with others, and caring for those around us.
We can never know how much of this sense was innate in him, or how much was shaped in adark and solitary cell.  But we remember the gestures, large and small -- introducing hisjailers as honored guests at his inauguration; taking a pitch in a Springbok uniform; turninghis family’s heartbreak into a call to confront HIV/AIDS -- that revealed the depth of hisempathy and his understanding.  He not only embodied Ubuntu, he taught millions to find thattruth within themselves.
It took a man like Madiba to free not just the prisoner, but the jailer as well -- to show thatyou must trust others so that they may trust you; to teach that reconciliation is not a matterof ignoring a cruel past, but a means of confronting it with inclusion and generosity and truth. He changed laws, but he also changed hearts.
For the people of South Africa, for those he inspired around the globe, Madiba’s passing isrightly a time of mourning, and a time to celebrate a heroic life.  But I believe it should alsoprompt in each of us a time for self-reflection.  With honesty, regardless of our station or ourcircumstance, we must ask:  How well have I applied his lessons in my own life?  It’s aquestion I ask myself, as a man and as a President.
We know that, like South Africa, the United States had to overcome centuries of racialsubjugation.  As was true here, it took sacrifice -- the sacrifice of countless people, known andunknown, to see the dawn of a new day.  Michelle and I are beneficiaries of that struggle.  Butin America, and in South Africa, and in countries all around the globe, we cannot allow ourprogress to cloud the fact that our work is not yet done.
  
The struggles that follow the victory of formal equality or universal franchise may not be asfilled with drama and moral clarity as those that came before, but they are no less important. For around the world today, we still see children suffering from hunger and disease.  We stillsee run-down schools.  We still see young people without prospects for the future.  Around theworld today, men and women are still imprisoned for their political beliefs, and are stillpersecuted for what they look like, and how they worship, and who they love.  That ishappening today.
And so we, too, must act on behalf of justice.  We, too, must act on behalf of peace.  Thereare too many people who happily embrace Madiba’s legacy of racial reconciliation, butpassionately resist even modest reforms that would challenge chronic poverty and growinginequality.  There are too many leaders who claim solidarity with Madiba’s struggle forfreedom, but do not tolerate dissent from their own people.  And there are too many of us onthe sidelines, comfortable in complacency or cynicism when our voices must be heard.
The questions we face today -- how to promote equality and justice; how to uphold freedomand human rights; how to end conflict and sectarian war -- these things do not have easyanswers.  But there were no easy answers in front of that child born in World War I.  NelsonMandela reminds us that it always seems impossible until it is done.  South Africa shows thatis true.  South Africa shows we can change, that we can choose a world defined not by ourdifferences, but by our common hopes.  We can choose a world defined not by conflict, but bypeace and justice and opportunity.
We will never see the likes of Nelson Mandela again.  But let me say to the young people ofAfrica and the young people around the world -- you, too, can make his life’s work your own. Over 30 years ago, while still a student, I learned of Nelson Mandela and the struggles takingplace in this beautiful land, and it stirred something in me.  It woke me up to myresponsibilities to others and to myself, and it set me on an improbable journey that finds mehere today.  And while I will always fall short of Madiba’s example, he makes me want to be abetter man.  He speaks to what’s best inside us.
After this great liberator is laid to rest, and when we have returned to our cities and villagesand rejoined our daily routines, let us search for his strength.  Let us search for his largenessof spirit somewhere inside of ourselves.  And when the night grows dark, when injusticeweighs heavy on our hearts, when our best-laid plans seem beyond our reach, let us think ofMadiba and the words that brought him comfort within the four walls of his cell:  "It mattersnot how strait the gate, how charged with punishments the scroll, I am the master of my fate:I am the captain of my soul."
What a magnificent soul it was.  We will miss him deeply.  May God bless the memory ofNelson Mandela.  May God bless the people of South Africa.
 1
Rivonia Trial Speech (final paragraph)
