To Irene, Ken, Jennifer, Danny's friends and former colleagues, it is an extraordinary honor tobe here with you in this magnificent place to pay tribute to a man who would probably wewondering what all the fuss is about. 
This Tuesday was in many ways a day like any other.  The sun rose; the sun set; the greatwork of our democracy carried on.  But in a fundamental sense it was different.  It was thefirst day in many of our lives -- certainly my own -- that the halls of the United StatesCongress were not graced by the presence of Daniel Ken Inouye. 
Danny was elected to the U.S. Senate when I was two years old.  He had been elected toCongress a couple of years before I was born.  He would remain my senator until I left Hawaiifor college.
Now, even though my mother and grandparents took great pride that they had voted for him,I confess that I wasn't paying much attention to the United States Senate at the age of four orfive or six.  It wasn't until I was 11 years old that I recall even learning what a U.S. senatorwas, or it registering, at least.  It was during my summer vacation with my family -- my firsttrip to what those of us in Hawaii call the Mainland. 
  
So we flew over the ocean, and with my mother and my grandmother and my sister, who atthe time was two, we traveled around the country.  It was a big trip.  We went to Seattle, andwe went to Disneyland -- which was most important.  We traveled to Kansas where mygrandmother's family was from, and went to Chicago, and went to Yellowstone.  And we tookGreyhound buses most of the time, and we rented cars, and we would stay at local motels orHoward Johnson's.  And if there was a pool at one of these motels, even if it was just tiny, Iwould be very excited. And the ice machine was exciting -- and the vending machine, I wasreally excited about that. 
But this is at a time when you didn’t have 600 stations and 24 hours' worth of cartoons.  Andso at night, if the TV was on, it was what your parents decided to watch.  And my mother thatsummer would turn on the TV every night during this vacation and watch the Watergatehearings.  And I can't say that I understood everything that was being discussed, but I knewthe issues were important.  I knew they spoke to some basic way about who we were andwho we might be as Americans.
And so, slowly, during the course of this trip, which lasted about a month, some of this seepedinto my head.  And the person who fascinated me most was this man of Japanese descentwith one arm, speaking in this courtly baritone, full of dignity and grace.  And maybe hecaptivated my attention because my mom explained that this was our senator and that he wasupholding what our government was all about.  Maybe it was a boyhood fascination with thestory of how he had lost his arm in a war.  But I think it was more than that. 
Now, here I was, a young boy with a white mom, a black father, raised in Indonesia andHawaii.  And I was beginning to sense how fitting into the world might not be as simple as itmight seem.  And so to see this man, this senator, this powerful, accomplished person whowasn't out of central casting when it came to what you'd think a senator might look like at thetime, and the way he commanded the respect of an entire nation I think it hinted to me whatmight be possible in my own life.
This was a man who as a teenager stepped up to serve his country even after his fellowJapanese Americans were declared enemy aliens; a man who believed in America even whenits government didn't necessarily believe in him.  That meant something to me.  It gave me apowerful sense -- one that I couldn’t put into words -- a powerful sense of hope. 
And as I watched those hearings, listening to Danny ask all those piercing questions nightafter night, I learned something else.  I learned how our democracy was supposed to work,our government of and by and for the people; that we had a system of government wherenobody is above the law, where we have an obligation to hold each other accountable, fromthe average citizen to the most powerful of leaders, because these things that we stand for,these ideals that we hold dear are bigger than any one person or party or politician. 
  
And, somehow, nobody communicated that more effectively than Danny Inouye.  You got asense, as Joe mentioned, of just a fundamental integrity; that he was a proud Democrat, butmost importantly, he was a proud American.  And were it not for those two insights planted inmy head at the age of 11, in between Disneyland and a trip to Yellowstone, I might neverhave considered a career in public service.  I might not be standing here today. 
I think it's fair to say that Danny Inouye was perhaps my earliest political inspiration.  Andthen, for me to have the privilege of serving with him, to be elected to the United StatesSenate and arrive, and one of my first visits is to go to his office, and for him to greet me as acolleague, and treat me with the same respect that he treated everybody he met, and to sitme down and give me advice about how the Senate worked and then regale me with somestories about wartime and his recovery -- stories full of humor, never bitterness, neverboastfulness,  just matter-of-fact -- some of them I must admit a little off-color.  I couldn’tprobably repeat them in the cathedral.  (Laughter.)  There’s a side of Danny that -- well.
Danny once told his son his service to this country had been for the children, or all the sonsand daughters who deserved to grow up in a nation that never questioned their patriotism. This is my country, he said.  Many of us have fought hard for the right to say that.  And,obviously, Rick Shinseki described what it meant for Japanese Americans, but my point is, isthat when he referred to our sons and daughters he wasn’t just talking about JapaneseAmericans.  He was talking about all of us.  He was talking about those who serve today whomight have been excluded in the past.  He’s talking about me.
And that’s who Danny was.  For him, freedom and dignity were not abstractions.  They werevalues that he had bled for, ideas he had sacrificed for, rights he understood as only someonecan who has had them threatened, had them taken away.
The valor that earned him our nation’s highest military decoration -- a story so incredible thatwhen you actually read the accounts, you think this -- you couldn’t make this up.  It’s like outof an action movie.  That valor was so rooted in a deep and abiding love of this country.  Andhe believed, as we say in Hawaii that we’re a single ‘ohana -- that we're one family.  And hedevoted his life to making that family strong.
After experiencing the horror of war himself, Danny also felt a profound connection to thosewho followed.  It wasn’t unusual for him to take time out of his busy schedule to sit down witha veteran or a fellow amputee, trading stories, telling jokes -- two heroes, generations apart,sharing an unspoken bond that was forged in battle and tempered in peace.  In no smallmeasure because of Danny’s service, our military is, and will always remain, the best in theworld, and we recognize our sacred obligation to give our veterans the care they deserve. 
Of course, Danny didn’t always take credit for the difference he made.  Ever humble, one ofthe only landmarks that bear his name is a Marine Corps mess hall in Hawaii.  And whensomeone asked him how he wanted to be remembered, Danny said, “I represented the peopleof Hawaii and this nation honestly and to the best of my ability.  I think I did okay.”
  
Danny, you were more than okay.  You were extraordinary.
It’s been mentioned that Danny ended his convention speech in Chicago in 1968 with theword, “aloha.”  “To some of you who visited us, it may have meant hello,” he said, but “Toothers, it may have meant goodbye.  Those of us who’ve been privileged to live in Hawaiiunderstand aloha means I love you.”
And as someone who has been privileged to live in Hawaii, I know that he embodied the verybest of that spirit, the very best of “aloha.”  It’s fitting it was the last word that Danny spokeon this Earth.  He may have been saying goodbye to us.  Maybe he was saying hello tosomeone waiting on the other side.  But it was a final expression most of all of his love for thefamily and friends that he cared so much about, for the men and women he was honored toserve with, for the country that held such a special place in his heart.
And so we remember a man who inspired all of us with his courage, and moved us with hiscompassion, that inspired us with his integrity, and who taught so many of us -- including ayoung kid growing up in Hawaii -- that America has a place for everyone.
May God bless Daniel Inouye.
And may God grant us more souls like his.
