First of all, let me thank President Hennessy for not just the introduction but for youroutstanding leadership at one of the great universities of the world.  I’ve got to admit, like, Ikind of want to go here.  I was trying to figure out why it is that a really nice place like this iswasted on young people -- who don’t fully appreciate what you got.  It’s really nice.  Andeverybody here is so friendly and smart, and it’s beautiful.  And what’s there not to like?
I want to thank you and everyone at Stanford for hosting this summit, especially Amy Zegart,George Triantis, and someone who served as a great advisor to me at the White House and asan outstanding ambassador to Russia before coming back to The Farm -- Mike McFaul.
It is great to be here at Leland Stanford Junior University.  And I’m pleased to be joined bymembers of my team who bleed Cardinal red.  We’re infiltrated with Stanford people.  We’vegot Senior Advisor Valerie Jarrett, National Security Advisor Susan Rice, Secretary ofCommerce Penny Pritzker.   And, let’s face it, I like Stanford grads.  I noticed Steve Chu wasaround here, who helped lead our Energy Department for a while.  And he’s now hanging out. I’m also pleased to be joined by other members of my Cabinet -- our Secretary of HomelandSecurity Jeh Johnson is here, and our Small Business Administrator, Maria Contreras-Sweet. And I want to acknowledge my tireless Homeland Security Advisor who helped, and continuesto shape, our cybersecurity efforts -- Lisa Monaco.  Thank you, Lisa.  
  
So I’d always heard about this campus, and everybody is riding bikes, and people hoppinginto fountains -- and the current holder of The Axe.  This is the place that made “nerd” cool. Iwas thinking about wearing some black-rimmed glasses, some tape in the middle, but I guessthat’s not what you do anymore.  Ambassador McFaul told me if I came to Stanford, you’d“talk nerdy to me.”
But I’m not just here to enjoy myself.  As we gather here today, America is seeing incredibleprogress that we can all be proud of.  We just had the best year of job growth since the1990s.  Over the past 59 months, our businesses have created nearly 12 million new jobs,which is the longest streak of private sector job growth on record.  And in a hopeful sign formiddle-class families, wages are beginning to rise again.
And, meanwhile, we’re doing more to prepare our young people for a competitive world.  Ourhigh school graduation rate has hit an all-time high.  More Americans are finishing collegethan ever before.  Here at Stanford and across the country, we’ve got the best universities,we’ve got the best scientists, the best researchers in the world.  We’ve got the most dynamiceconomy in the world.  And no place represents that better than this region.  So make nomistake, more than any other nation on Earth, the United States is positioned to lead in the21st century. 
And so much of our economic competitiveness is tied to what brings me here today, and thatis America’s leadership in the digital economy.  It’s our ability -- almost unique across theplanet -- our ability to innovate and to learn, and to discover, and to create, and build, and dobusiness online, and stretch the boundaries of what’s possible.  That’s what drives us.  And sowhen we had to decide where to have this summit, the decision was easy, because so much ofour Information Age began right here, at Stanford.   
It was here where two students, Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard, met and then, in a garage notfar from here, started a company that eventually built one of the first personal computers,weighing in at 40 pounds.  It was from here, in 1968, where a researcher, Douglas Englebart,astonished an audience with two computers, connected “online,” and hypertext you could clickon with something called a “mouse.” 
A year later, a computer here received the first message from another computer 350 milesaway -- the beginnings of what would become the Internet.  And, by the way, it’s no secretthat many of these innovations built on government-funded research is one of the reasonsthat if we want to maintain our economic leadership in the world, America has to keepinvesting in basic research in science and technology.  It's absolutely critical.
So here at Stanford, pioneers developed the protocols and architecture of the Internet, DSL,the first webpage in America, innovations for cloud computing.  Student projects here becameYahoo and Google.  Those were pretty good student projects.  Your graduates have gone onto help create and build thousands of companies that have shaped our digital society -- fromCisco to Sun Microsystems, YouTube to Instagram, StubHub, Bonobos.
  
According to one study, if all the companies traced back to Stanford graduates formed theirown nation, you’d be one the largest economies in the world and have a pretty good footballteam as well.
And today, with your cutting-edge research programs and your new cyber initiatives, you’rehelping us navigate some of the most complicated cyber challenges that we face as a nation. And that’s why we’re here.  I want to thank all of you who have joined us today -- membersof Congress, representatives from the private sector, government, academia, privacy andconsumer groups, and especially the students who are here.  Just as we’re all connected likenever before, we have to work together like never before, both to seize opportunities but alsomeet the challenges of this Information Age. 
And it’s one of the great paradoxes of our time that the very technologies that empower us todo great good can also be used to undermine us and inflict great harm.  The same informationtechnologies that help make our military the most advanced in the world are targeted byhackers from China and Russia who go after our defense contractors and systems that arebuilt for our troops.  The same social media we use in government to advocate for democracyand human rights around the world can also be used by terrorists to spread hatefulideologies.  So these cyber threats are a challenge to our national security. 
Much of our critical infrastructure -- our financial systems, our power grid, health systems --run on networks connected to the Internet, which is hugely empowering but also dangerous,and creates new points of vulnerability that we didn’t have before.  Foreign governments andcriminals are probing these systems every single day.  We only have to think of real-lifeexamples -- an air traffic control system going down and disrupting flights, or blackouts thatplunge cities into darkness -- to imagine what a set of systematic cyber attacks might do.  Sothis is also a matter of public safety. As a nation, we do more business online than ever before -- trillions of dollars a year.  Andhigh-tech industries, like those across the Valley, support millions of American jobs.  All thisgives us an enormous competitive advantage in the global economy.  And for that veryreason, American companies are being targeted, their trade secrets stolen, intellectualproperty ripped off.  The North Korean cyber attack on Sony Pictures destroyed data anddisabled thousands of computers, and exposed the personal information of Sony employees. And these attacks are hurting American companies and costing American jobs.  So this is alsoa threat to America’s economic security.
As consumers, we do more online than ever before.  We manage our bank accounts.  Weshop.  We pay our bills.  We handle our medical records.  And as a country, one of ourgreatest resources are the young people who are here today --digitally fearless andunencumbered by convention, and uninterested in old debates.  And they’re remaking theworld every day.  But it also means that this problem of how we secure this digital world isonly going to increase. 
  
I want more Americans succeeding in our digital world.  I want young people like you tounleash the next waves of innovation, and launch the next startups, and give Americans thetools to create new jobs and new businesses, and to expand connectivity in places that wecurrently can't imagine, to help open up new world and new experiences and empowerindividuals in ways that would seem unimaginable 10, 15, 20 years ago. 
And that’s why we’re working to connect 99 percent of America’s students to high-speedInternet -- because when it comes to educating our children, we can’t afford any digitaldivides.  It’s why we’re helping more communities get across to the next generation ofbroadband faster, with cheaper Internet, so that students and entrepreneurs and smallbusinesses across America, not just in pockets of America, have the same opportunities tolearn and compete as you do here in the Valley.  It’s why I’ve come out so strongly andpublicly for net neutrality, for an open and free Internet -- because we have to preserve oneof the greatest engines for creativity and innovation in human history.
So our connectivity brings extraordinary benefits to our daily lives, but it also brings risks. And when companies get hacked, Americans’ personal information, including their financialinformation, gets stolen.  Identity theft can ruin your credit rating and turn your life upsidedown.  In recent breaches, more than 100 million Americans had their personal datacompromised, including, in some cases, credit card information.  We want our children to goonline and explore the world, but we also want them to be safe and not have their privacyviolated.  So this is a direct threat to the economic security of American families, not just theeconomy overall, and to the wellbeing of our children, which means we’ve got to put in placemechanisms to protect them.
So shortly after I took office, before I had gray hair -- I said that these cyber threats were oneof the most serious economic national security challenges that we face as a nation, and Imade confronting them a priority.  And given the complexity of these threats, I believe wehave to be guided by some basic principles.  So let me share those with you today.
First, this has to be a shared mission.  So much of our computer networks and criticalinfrastructure are in the private sector, which means government cannot do this alone.  Butthe fact is that the private sector can’t do it alone either, because it’s government that oftenhas the latest information on new threats.  There’s only one way to defend America fromthese cyber threats, and that is through government and industry working together, sharingappropriate information as true partners.  
Second, we have to focus on our unique strengths.  Government has many capabilities, butit’s not appropriate or even possible for government to secure the computer networks ofprivate businesses.  Many of the companies who are here today are cutting-edge, but theprivate sector doesn’t always have the capabilities needed during a cyber attack, thesituational awareness, or the ability to warn other companies in real time, or the capacity tocoordinate a response across companies and sectors.  So we’re going to have to be smart andefficient and focus on what each sector does best, and then do it together.
  
Third, we’re going to have to constantly evolve.  The first computer viruses hit personalcomputers in the early 1980s, and essentially, we’ve been in a cyber arms race ever since. We design new defenses, and then hackers and criminals design new ways to penetratethem.  Whether it’s phishing or botnets, spyware or malware, and now ransomware, theseattacks are getting more and more sophisticated every day.  So we’ve got to be just as fastand flexible and nimble in constantly evolving our defenses.  
And fourth, and most importantly, in all our work we have to make sure we are protecting theprivacy and civil liberty of the American people.  And we grapple with these issues ingovernment.  We’ve pursued important reforms to make sure we are respecting peoples’privacy as well as ensuring our national security.  And the private sector wrestles with this aswell.  When consumers share their personal information with companies, they deserve toknow that it’s going to be protected.  When government and industry share information aboutcyber threats, we’ve got to do so in a way that safeguards your personal information.  Whenpeople go online, we shouldn’t have to forfeit the basic privacy we’re entitled to asAmericans. 
In recent years, we’ve worked to put these principles into practice.  And as part of ourcomprehensive strategy, we’ve boosted our defenses in government, we’re sharing moreinformation with the private sector to help those companies defend themselves, we’re workingwith industry to use what we call a Cybersecurity Framework to prevent, respond to, andrecover from attacks when they happen.
And, by the way, I recently went to the National Cybersecurity Communications IntegrationCenter, which is part of the Department of Homeland Security, where representatives fromgovernment and the private sector monitor cyber threats 24/7.  And so defending againstcyber threats, just like terrorism or other threats, is one more reason that we are calling onCongress, not to engage in politics -- this is not a Republican or Democratic issue -- but workto make sure that our security is safeguarded and that we fully fund the Department ofHomeland Security, because it has great responsibilities in this area.
So we’re making progress, and I’ve recently announced new actions to keep up thismomentum.  We’ve called for a single national standard so Americans know within 30 days ifyour information has been stolen.  This month, we’ll be proposing legislation that we call aConsumer Privacy Bill of Rights to give Americans some baseline protections, like the right todecide what personal data companies collect from you, and the right to know how companiesare using that information.  We’ve proposed the Student Digital Privacy Act, which is modeledon the landmark law here in California -- because today’s amazing educational technologiesshould be used to teach our students and not collect data for marketing to students.
And we’ve also taken new steps to strengthen our cybersecurity -- proposing new legislationto promote greater information sharing between government and the private sector, includingliability protections for companies that share information about cyber threats.  Today, I’monce again calling on Congress to come together and get this done.
  
And this week, we announced the creation of our new Cyber Threat Intelligence IntegrationCenter.  Just like we do with terrorist threats, we’re going to have a single entity that’sanalyzing and integrating and quickly sharing intelligence about cyber threats acrossgovernment so we can act on all those threats even faster. And today, we’re taking an additional step -- which is why there’s a desk here.  You werewondering, I'm sure.  I’m signing a new executive order to promote even more informationsharing about cyber threats, both within the private sector and between government and theprivate sector.  And it will encourage more companies and industries to set up organizations --hubs -- so you can share information with each other.  It will call for a common set ofstandards, including protections for privacy and civil liberties, so that government can sharethreat information with these hubs more easily.  And it can help make it easier for companiesto get the classified cybersecurity threat information that they need to protect theircompanies.
I want to acknowledge, by the way, that the companies who are represented here arestepping up as well.  The Cyber Threat Alliance, which includes companies like Palo AltoNetworks and Symantec, are going to work with us to share more information under this newexecutive order.  You’ve got companies from Apple to Intel, from Bank of America to PG&E,who are going to use the Cybersecurity Framework to strengthen their own defenses.  As partof our BuySecure Initiative, Visa and MasterCard and American Express and others are goingto make their transactions more secure.  Nationstar is joining companies that are giving theircompanies [customers] another weapon to battle identity theft, and that's free access to theircredit scores. And more companies are moving to new, stronger technologies to authenticate user identities,like biometrics -- because it’s just too easy for hackers to figure out usernames andpasswords, like “password.”  Or “12345 -- 7.”   Those are some of my previous passwords. I've changed them since then.
So this summit is an example of what we need more of -- all of us working together to dowhat none of us can achieve alone.  And it is difficult.  Some of the challenges I’ve describedtoday have defied solutions for years.  And I want to say very clearly that, as somebody whois a former constitutional law teacher, and somebody who deeply values his privacy and hisfamily’s privacy -- although I chose the wrong job for that -- but will be a private citizenagain, and cares deeply about this -- I have to tell you that grappling with how governmentprotects the American people from adverse events while, at the same time, making sure thatgovernment itself is not abusing its capabilities is hard. 
The cyber world is sort of the wild, wild West.  And to some degree, we're asked to be thesheriff.  When something like Sony happens, people want to know what can government doabout this.  If information is being shared by terrorists in the cyber world and an attackhappens, people want to know are there ways of stopping that from happening.
  
By necessity, that means government has its own significant capabilities in the cyber world. But then people, rightly, ask, well, what safeguards do we have against government intrudingon our own privacy?  And it's hard, and it constantly evolves because the technology so oftenoutstrips whatever rules and structures and standards have been put in place, which meansthat government has to be constantly self-critical and we have to be able to have an opendebate about it.   
But we’re all here today because we know that we're going to have to break through some ofthese barriers that are holding us back if we are going to continue to thrive in this remarkablenew world.  We all know what we need to do.  We have to build stronger defenses and disruptmore attacks.  We have to make cyberspace safer.  We have to improve cooperation acrossthe board.  And, by the way, this is not just here in America, but internationally -- which also,by the way, makes things complicated because a lot of countries don't necessarily share ourinvestment -- or our commitment to openness, and we have to try to navigate that.
But this should not be an ideological issue.  And that’s one thing I want to emphasize:  This isnot a Democratic issue, or a Republican issue.  This is not a liberal or conservative issue. Everybody is online, and everybody is vulnerable.  The business leaders here want theirprivacy and their children protected, just like the consumer and privacy advocates here wantAmerica to keep leading the world in technology and be safe from attacks.  So I’m hopefulthat through this forum and the work that we do subsequently, that we're able to generateideas and best practices, and that the work of this summit can help guide our planning andexecution for years to come. 
After all, we are just getting started.  Think about it.  Tim Berners-Lee, from his lab inSwitzerland, invented the World Wide Web in 1989, which was only 26 years ago.  The greatepochs in human history -- the Bronze Age, Iron Age, Agricultural Revolution, IndustrialRevolution -- they spanned centuries.  We’re only 26 years into this Internet Age.  We’ve onlyscratched the surface.  And as I guess they say at Google, “The future is awesome.”  Wehaven’t even begun to imagine the discoveries and innovations that are going to be unleashedin the decades to come.  But we know how we’ll get there. 
Reflecting on his work in the 1960s on ARPANET, the precursor of the Internet, the late PaulBaran said this:  “The process of technological developments is like building a cathedral.  Overthe course of several hundred years, new people come along and each lays down a block ontop of the old foundations, each saying, ‘I built the cathedral.’  And then comes along anhistorian who asks, ‘Well, who built the cathedral?’”  And Baran said, “If you’re not careful,you can con yourself into believing that you did the most important part.  But the reality isthat each contribution has to follow on to previous work.  Everything is tied to everythingelse.”
  
Everything is tied to everything else.  The innovations that first appeared on this campus allthose decades ago -- that first mouse, that first message -- helped lay a foundation.  And inthe decades since, on campuses like this, in companies like those that are represented here,new people have come along, each laying down a block, one on top of the other.  And whenfuture historians ask who built this Information Age, it won’t be any one of us who did themost important part alone.  The answer will be, “We all did, as Americans.”
And I’m absolutely confident that if we keep at this, if we keep working together in a spirit ofcollaboration, like all those innovators before us, our work will endure, like a great cathedral,for centuries to come.  And that cathedral will not just be about technology, it will be aboutthe values that we’ve embedded in the architecture of this system.  It will be about privacy,and it will be about community.  And it will be about connection.  What a magnificentcathedral that all of you have helped to build.  We want to be a part of that, and we lookforward to working with you in the future.
Thank you for your partnership.  With that, I’m going to sign this executive order.
Thank you.
