President Obama:  Well, hello everybody. Jambo. It's good to see you. The -- Well, this is avery good-looking group.  So it's wonderful to be with all of you.  My name is Barack Obama. In case you didn’t know.  I want to, first of all, begin by thanking Kenyatta University forhosting us here today.  We are very grateful.  And the Vice Chancellor is here -- Madam ViceChancellor, thank you.  
And before we get started, I want to point out that this is one of our first regional centers forthe Young African Leaders program -- the Young African Leaders Initiative -- or YALI -- thatwe're doing.  As many of you know, this is one of my labors of love here in Africa, anoutgrowth of some of the work that we had been doing.  Seeing the incredible contributionsthat young leaders were making in so many countries, we thought let’s bring them togetherand give them opportunities to learn from each other, and network and access resources, sothat they can, then, in their home countries, be able to accomplish remarkable things.  And so we're really excited about that.  So we thank the university for allowing us to usethese facilities for these outstanding people.
I just gave a very long speech.  
Audience Comment: We saw it.  
President Obama:  You're saying it was also too long?  Is that what you're saying?  Shenodded.  She was all like, yes, it was very long.  
  
So because you just saw my speech, it doesn’t make sense for me to give a whole ‘notherspeech.  I'm really here more to listen and to learn. But I do want to just make a couple ofbrief remarks at the top.  And then what I'm going to do is I'm going to call on a number ofyou.  I've got a few names already to get us started, and then depending on how much timewe have, then I'll try to see if I can call on some additional persons.
America has historically been a country of people who participate in the lives of theircommunities and their societies.  And it's one of the things that make us, I believe, a greatnation.  There’s a famous French writer named Alec de Tocqueville, who traveled to the UnitedStates, and wrote a very famous book called “Democracy in America.”  And the point that hemade in this book during the course of his travels was that what made America a democracywas not just that it had elections, but that it was a society of joiners and volunteers, andpeople who wanted constantly to be involved in making their communities better.  And if therewas an injustice, they wanted to do something about it.  And they would form organizationsand they would form town halls, and disseminate information -- so that what the governmentdid was obviously important, but what was just as important was what individual citizens wereable to do to create a fabric of mutual concern and regard and advocacy that would shapegovernment policy and would shape how societies were organized.
And almost all the progress that America has made in expanding freedom and opportunity hasgrown as a result of that bottom-up civic participation.  The civil rights movement, thewomen’s rights movement, the movement most recently to make sure that our gay andlesbian brothers and sisters have equal rights, the movement to end wars, in some cases, themovement to provide better resources for poor children.  And there’s the halfway housemovement, and the movement to -- the settlement house movement, rather, and to makesure that children and orphans were properly cared for.  The movement to public educationand public universities.  The environmental movement.
So many of these things arose because ordinary citizens started to get together and speak outand press their demands on their government. And eventually, politicians responded.  
And I got my start in public life not as an elected official but as a community organizer in apoor neighborhood in Chicago.  And I would work with churches and community groups to tryto improve the school system, or bring affordable housing.  And we weren't always completelysuccessful, but it taught me the importance of the voices of ordinary people when they cometogether to create a better vision for the future.
And that's why I think civil society is so important.  And that's why I emphasized it in thespeech that I made today.  And this is something that I emphasize wherever I go --democracy does not stop on Election Day.  For a real democracy to work, and for a society tothrive and continually improve, it requires that people continue to participate.  And there haveto be laws in place to protect that space and facilitate people’s ability to participate.  
  
Now, the good news is, here in Kenya, you now have a constitution that creates the space forsuch participation.  Alongside freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly, and the abilityto organize politically, these are precious freedoms that have to be protected.
Because Kenya is a young democracy there’s always a concern that it might slip back and thatspace might narrow, despite what the constitution says.  And I just want to say part of thereason why it's important for me to be here today is to send a message that we in the UnitedStates at least believe that civil society is important and we want to continue to affirm it, andwe want to listen and hear what it is that ordinary citizens, working together, have to sayabout their communities and about their lives.
And if Kenya can continue to cultivate those habits of participation and citizenship andfreedom, then the country is going to be better off, and it's going to continue to makeprogress for all people and not just some.  
So with those opening remarks, what I want to do now is just open it up for conversation. And I have in my hand some names to call on.  I may not get through all of them.  I thinkyou’ve been instructed to try to be relatively brief.  In some cases, what I'll do is I'll respondright away to the comments.  In some cases, I may wait and respond at the end.  But this isdesigned not so much as a town hall, to ask me questions, it's more designed for you to giveme a sense of the things that are important to you, so that I can learn -- and because I thinkthis is going to be televised -- so that the Kenya people as a whole can hear as well.
And the only thing I would ask is that everybody be respectful.  And one of the rules of goodcivil society I believe is that you’re respectful of the people who disagree with you.  And that'spart of what makes civil society work.  If you can have civil disagreements, and you can listento each other and not just shout, that's what creates an environment that leads to progressover the long term.
And the only other thing I'm going to do is, because it's warm, I'm going to take off myjacket.  You're free to do so as well.  This is pretty relaxed.  
Okay, so -- and we've got a few topics where we've got some civil society organizations thatare already working on some of these issues. And one of the topics that hasn’t gotten a lot ofattention during my trip but I consider very important because it's part of Kenya’s heritage,but it's also part of global heritage -- and that is the issue of wildlife trafficking, where activecitizens are really making a difference.
And I'm going to call on Tom Lalampaa of the Northern Rangelands Trust, to tell us aboutwhat he’s doing.
Mr. Lalampaa:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I work for Northern Rangelands TrustEntity, an umbrella community organization currently supporting over 30 community-basedconservancies.  
  
We've had a lot of successes on the trafficking as well.  But I just want to mention two high-
level impacts.  One is that we've been able to develop a model of a community conservancythat is unique, that has proven very successful, now widely accepted by the nationalgovernment and the county governments.  And all the model has is that, first and foremost, isthat it is grassroots-rooted.  It's formed by the local communities -- by the elders, the womenand the youth in the villages.  And so these institutions help to anchor good governance,gender matters, awareness, micro-finance for our youth and our women, s well, and many,many more programs, including the -- getting water.  It's become an entry point for thenational government and the county governments to deliver services to the local communities.
It's also structured in such a way that the political leaders take part in those institutions.  Sothey are local community institutions that are registered with the government.  And it's justamazing, because they are creating a platform for dialogue -- a platform for communities todecide where they want water, where they want help, where they want -- what they want todo in matters.
The second high-level impact, Mr. President, is getting conservation to drive peace andconflict resolution in northern Kenya.  In northern Kenya, peace and security is quite elusivefor many reasons.  One is because of illegal firearms.  Secondly, it's just because of thenature of the mistrust among our ethic communities.  And thirdly, also because of the naturalresources -- pasture, water for our cattle.  And so we've managed to get the conservation todrive peace and conflict resolution in northern Kenya.  
I was telling my friend, Paula, here that when communities, local communities -- they wantpeace.  There’s no way the elephants live in peace.  So that's what I'm saying, Mr. President,that all that has been made possible through the support of the U.S. government, and inparticular, through the USAID Kenya.
Mr. President, we have a number of challenges, but I'll put them in terms of a kind request toyou.  One, we’d appreciate the U.S. government support to protect and conserve theremaining African elephants.  I'm saying the remaining because we have lost many.  You canhelp us in three ways.  First and foremost is to crush demand and market, Mr. President.  Noteven reducing it.  if we can, let’s crush it once and for all.
The Kenya government -- the civil society, ourselves, and the local communities can onlyprevent poaching from the source, from being poached.  But the markets and the demand,Mr. President, are far outside our borders.  We are helpless.  Please help us.
The other way you can help us protect and conserve the remaining African elephants, Mr.President, is to get the U.S. government be a member of the African-led elephants protectioninitiative.  Currently, nine African states have signed to it.  So it would just bring enormoussupport and recognition if your government can join it and also be a part of it.
  
Thirdly, in terms of helping us conserve and protect our elephants, the remaining, is to helpus deal with the ivory.  The second request that I think would benefit all of us here, Mr.President, my request also is that if possible -- we notice this is discussed all the time, but ourhumble request of the U.S. government is to increase the international support for theinternational programs.  And I have in mind, I talk about the U.S. aid that's involved, and anyother U.S. government-related development agencies -- because it's from that pot that we aregoing to support conservation, that we can improve livelihoods, that we can supportgovernance.
I always have a feeling that the USAID office, wherever they are in Africa, and in the world,they get massive applications, and they can only deal with so much.  Lastly, Mr. President, Imust admit the fact that the embassy’s office -- the USAID offices have been very good withus and extremely supportive.
Thank you so much, Mr. President.
President Obama:  Let me just say, first of all, Tom, you’re an eloquent spokesman for yourcause and that was an excellent presentation.  The second thing I have to say is thateverybody is going to have to be briefer than Tom.  Just because I want to make sure that Iget as many comments as possible.
The third point is, with respect to conservation, you said the elephants that have been lost --20,000 elephants have been lost in recent years. And part of the reason why civil society hasto be mobilized around conservation is that if people have a choice -- if they see a false choicebetween their own livelihoods and conserving animals then the animals will lose.  If they’reorganized so that they see that preservation and conservation enhances their lives, then wewin, because they feel ownership and they will participate.
And that's why the organizations that you're putting together are so important.  
Now, we've got another person just on this issue before we move to another issue -- PaulaKahumbu, right here.  I could tell because she’s got an arm band that says, “Hands Off OurElephants.”  With the Wildlife Trust.  
Ms. Kahumbu:  Thank you, Mr. President.  First, on behalf of all the conservation community-- and there are several people in the room -- thank you so much for your initiatives on theAfrican elephant in particular.
More than 30,000 elephants --
President Obama:  30,000.
  
Ms. Kahumbu:  -- are being killed every year in Africa.  That's one every 15 minutes.  Yourgrandchildren elephants.  I love elephants.  I want the whole world to fall in love withelephants.  And I started this campaign, “Hands Off Our Elephants,” under the organization,Wildlife Direct, with the First Lady Margaret Kenyatta, to empower and mobilize Kenyans,Africans across the entire continent to save elephants.  They are our heritage.  They are ouridentity.  And it's our duty.  And it's not just Africans who benefit from this.  The whole worldbenefits.  
It's not been easy, but our work has really led to a change in the hearts and minds ofKenyans, and also the laws.  We've been at the center of judicial reforms in this country.  Ourwork has led to the arrest of one of the most -- what do I say --notorious suspected ivorykingpins, Feisal Mohamed Ali.  For the first time in Kenya, an ivory trafficker is behind bars. And that's thanks to support from your embassy, through Ambassador Godec, and manyother organizations.  
And while we're succeeding locally in Kenya, poaching is down, the problem across Africa isescalating, and the demand for ivory is actually exploding.  We're dealing with a wildlife crisisalone.  We're dealing with international wildlife crime.  And that's why my organization goesafter traffickers.  We're dealing with people who are funding terrorism, and we're dealing witha crime that is fueled by corruption.  
So we have two requests.  The first is that you take this message back to the Americanpeople.  We're often asked, how can we help.  It's very simple:  Tell the American people,don't buy ivory.  It's the simplest way to help.  Secondly, we request that the USA takes alead in pursuing international wildlife traffickers with the same vigor and rigor that you applyto money laundering and drug crimes.  And we believe that this can be done throughstrengthening your legal assistance role not just in the demand countries, but sourcecountries and transit countries.  
Because we know that the number of people involved in this crime is actually relatively smallcompared to those other crimes.  And so we can crush this very quickly and end the war andsave elephants for all of humanity.  
Thank you.  
President Obama:  Thank you.  Well, as you may have noted, yesterday one of ourannouncements was to be even stricter with respect to any ivory sales inside the UnitedStates.  I mean, we really are cracking down on that.  
And with respect to the international networks, you're absolutely right that there’s aconnection between corrupt officials getting paid, criminals being armed, and the ivory trade.You have this linkage that should be of concern to all of us.  And it's international in scope.  
  
Most recently, the United States is involved in negotiations with the Asian countries, the AsiaPacific region -- something called the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  One of the things we're tryingto accomplish in the trade agreement is for many of these countries with still strong demandfor ivory to start getting much more serious about the enforcement of their laws, and have itembedded in the trade agreements that we initiate.
So, hopefully, we'll be able to influence not just what happens in the United States, but also insome of the areas where the demand is heaviest.
Another topic where we've seen some progress, and this is something that's close to my heartbecause I've got two daughters, and close to Michelle’s heart -- she’s been involvedinternationally, trying to highlight the issue of girls’ education with what we're calling the LetGirls Learn initiative that involves many of our international agencies -- is the issue of girls’education.  Obviously I've made it a big emphasis in my speech here today.
So we've got a couple of people to talk about some of the work that's being done through civilsociety on this issue.  And I'm going to start with Kennedy Odede of Shining Hope forCommunities.
Mr. Odede:  Mr. President, it's my pleasure and privilege to meet someone like you whobelieves in grassroots change. You and I, we share one background that you did social work inChicago and I'm doing it in Kibera where I grew up.  I grew us whereby it's really hard tomake it. There’s no hope, no dream.  Many young men end up being -- go to crime.  It's easyfor them -- if they’re not able to enjoy even tourism because they don't have a dream. There’s no hope in them.
Mr. President, I was really having a hard time in my community, but we said, enough isenough -- and, yes, we can!  We came together with a soccer ball and that became amovement that really circled around girls’ education.  We built the first school in Kibera calledKibera School for Girls and then started providing social services to men, too.  And thatbecame world-changing.
But my challenge is that how do you take a grassroots thing like this across Africa, and byhaving more partners joining that?  Thank you so much.
President Obama:  You know, organizations like yours, if you show that it works and you'recreating a model of success, then it's more likely that it gets adopted in other places.  Peoplelearn from seeing something succeed that people might not have believed before couldhappen.  And if they see that a school for girls in Kibera, with all the poverty there, issuccessful, that means it can succeed anywhere.  
So we're very encouraged by the good work that you're doing.  Now, we also have with us Linet Momposhi.  Linet is right there.  Now, Linet is a student andshe’s here from Pangani Girls Form Two.  Linet.  
  
Ms. Momposhi:  Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this chance. Let me speak with youactually of a friend of mine.  At the age of 12, this friend -- she dropped out of school andunderwent genital mutilation.  In my community, after undergoing such this, the [inaudible]said, she is ready for marriage.  She was married to a man older than her, twice her age.  Andnow at the age of 15, she has three children.  She’s not able to care for them, for theireducation.  She milks the cows in the morning and sells the milk so that she can havesomething to give to her children.
For me, I got an opportunity to be at a boarding school in Kakenya Center.  I had all thechance to study and I had all the time. I learned to milk the cows for my mom and preparemy siblings to go back to school. But now I'm studying in Pangani Girls, and become the firstgirl in the center.  And now I would like to be a cardiologist and study at Harvard University.  
President Obama:  That sounds good.
Ms. Momposhi:  And also I would like to set an example to the girls in my community that agirl can really become a cardiologist.  Thank you.  
President Obama:  That's wonderful.  Linet, hold on.  You were so inspiring.  Give Linet themic back.  Linet, how old are you right now?
Ms. Momposhi:  I'm 16 years old.
President Obama:  You’re 16 years old.  And how did you come to be able to go to theboarding school?
Ms. Momposhi:  I was helped by Kakenya, the Kakenya Center. And that's how I go to studyin Kakenya Center.  And my dreams started working in that center where I had a chance to goto Maryhill but I went to Pangani Girls. 
President Obama:  So there was a center there, and by you coming into the center, thenyou started having bigger dreams about what you might be able to do?
Ms. Momposhi:  Okay, I never used to have big dreams like now.  Before joining the center,I never knew what I was going to do because I never had any hope in life.
President Obama:  Yes.  So, Linet, I'm sure you're going to be an excellent cardiologist.  Sowe're very proud of you.  But it just sends a message in terms of why civil society is soimportant.  So many of our young people who have a lot of talent, but they just don't knowwhat’s possible.  And sometimes the most important thing is just to show them that this iswhat could happen in your life if you work hard.  And when they have a vision about whatcould happen, then suddenly they’re motivated, the same way that Linet is motivated.  Andshe stars having bigger ambitions about what’s possible.
  
That's part of the reason why civil society organizations that create mentorship programs andprograms for young people to interact in different professions and talk to people who havesucceeded is so important.  And in fact, in the United States I've set up something called MyBrother’s Keeper, designed to target disadvantaged youth so that they are connected tomentorship programs very similar to some of the work that resulted in Linet being inspired.
In fact, we have young people who are mentors at the White House and we connect them withall of our senior staff.  And I have dinner with them and give them advice.  I don't know ifthey listen to the advice, but I think they do.  
Linet, you're a very find young woman.  Congratulations.  We're very proud of you.  
So one of the issues, obviously, that’s been of concern lately in Kenya is terrorism.  This is anarea where I'm working extensively with the government.  This is something that we'reconcerned about internationally.  And obviously given what happened in places like Westgateand Garissa, Kenya is a source of concern as well.  But as I said in the press conferenceyesterday, one of the important lessons that we've learned is that you can't just fightterrorism through military and the police.  You also have to change people’s hearts and minds,and give them a sense that they’re included in the society and enlist them in assisting infighting against terrorism.
And so I actually think that it's important to include civil society in the fight against terrorism. That's what we're doing in the United States.  That's what we need to do here in Kenya aswell.  And so we've got a couple of organizations that are here that I want to call on just totalk about the kind of work they’re doing and what they’re finding on the ground in dealingwith this very important issue. 
And I'm going to start with Hassan Ole Nado, who is with SUPKEM.  He's the deputy secretarygeneral -- which is a very important title.  But, please, go ahead.  And describe for us whatSUPKEM does.  Is it regionally located?  Is it national?  Or is it more along the coast?  Tell meabout what it’s doing.
Mr. Ole Nado:  Thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity and also for having time withcivil society in Kenya. The Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims is an umbrella organization ofMuslim organizations in the country, particularly mosque and Muslim committees all over thecountry.  And also, we now have community-based organizations that are working at thecommunity level, but they found time to advocate and to be part of the Supreme Council ofKenya Muslims.
We are here, and we have been doing this work for the last two years because we are a littlebit late in the journey, but we realize that it’s very important for the community to beengaged. We have worked before by developing a Countering Violent Extremism advocacychapter.  That calls for community leaderships, calls for government engagement, and alsobrings other civil society organizations onboard so that we can be able to deal with this issue.
  
As you have already said, terrorism is not about military or the police or other things.  It’smore of community issues.  So it has both security and social aspect of it.  And I really thankyou because of the White House summit, which I was privileged to attend with Hussein Khalidof Haki Africa.  And after that particular meeting, when we came back to Kenya we found anopportunity to engage with government.  Because before that White House summit, theengagement or relationship between civil society was a little bit lower.  But thanks to thatconference, that really opened up the government to engage with civil society.
Through that meeting, actually, we have been able, as civil society, to engage government inthe development of a national counter-violent extremism strategy.  And I hope thegovernment will [inaudible] the strategy very soon.
We know a number of organizations who have been involved in this part of communityprojects, like Haki Africa and MUHURI are currently facing some problems.  And I hopethrough your engagement with the government, you’d be able to raise concerns of theseinstitutions.  I know that the American government cannot engage organizations that haverelationships with terrorist organizations.  And I that is one of the things that really think it isimportant to protect institutions or individuals who engaged in this particular work.
At the moment, we are also working with the returnees in this country -- we have young menand women who are somehow misadvised and found themselves in terrorist organizations. They found a way of getting back to their country, and there are not clear ways ofengagement.  I work with the government of Kenya because they gave amnesty to those whoare willing to be given the amnesty.  At the moment, we are really engaging them, and thegovernment is also opening up -- because at the moment now, they are also creating whatthey call interagency coordination centers at the county level where all arms of governmentare talking together before they take actions against suspected terrorists. 
The Muslim community, the leadership are also now onboard and they are really working onthe areas of counter-narrative, because there are two narratives here.  There is the ideologicalnarrative and there is the old narrative of marginalization and other aspects.  We talk aboutperceptions in the narrative of marginalization -- they are real issues that we are calling thegovernment to address those issues.
One of the issues is the lack of identification documents for young people.  I think it is veryimportant that that should too should be addressed.  We have a collapse of the educationsystem in the northeast because of terror organizations.  And I hope, as struggle to find waysand answers of how to deal with this problem, it is important for USAID, which I know they’vedone quite a lot of work in this country, to consider getting into education much more byengaging communities so that communities can run community-based organization educationsystems in the northeast so that we are avoid getting terrorists of tomorrow.  Because wehave over 400,000 young children who are not going to school because everybody else ispulled from there, from the region.  
  
Maybe if I could speak for many days, but I really thank you for this opportunity and also forhaving time with the civil society organizations.  
President Obama:  Thank you.  Before you give up the mic, let me just ask you a question. I’m glad that because of the White House summit that we had on countering violentextremism, that there was a more constructive conversation that was taking place.  
I think that point that you make is so important, which is reaching young people early.  WhatI hear you saying is, is that one of the problems that exists in certain parts of the country nowis because of fear, in some cases, and some of the existing structures not operating as well asthey should, that you just have children who don’t have access to educational resources and astructure, and then that makes them more vulnerable to recruitment into an organization thatcan give them some sense of purpose or meaning, even if it ends up being a very negativeone. Is that what’s I’m understanding?
Mr. Ole Nado:  Yes, it’s actually -- that is what it is.  Because after the unfortunate terrorattacks of Mandera, and later on the university in Garissa, those who were targeted --because those are targeting were doing it deliberately to create interreligious tension in thecountry.  So we have those people, who are non-Muslims from the region, pulling out of theregion because they feel it’s no longer safe for them to remain in that region.
But by pulling out, the region has been exposed because it doesn’t haven't adequateresources to address this gap that has emanated.  So to me, I think one of the things thatneed to consider is we need to build local organizations that can really break that gap at thecommunity level, it’s more sustainable because they’re communities at a lower level.
President Obama:  Thank you.  That’s very useful.  Somebody else I want to hear from isFauzia Abdi Ali, who’s with Women International Society.  
Ms. Abdi Ali:  Thank you.  I must start by congratulating you.  The speech was really, reallygood because it really advocated for issues of women, which is an area of passion.  I’m notspeaking as WIS today, I’m actually speaking as Sisters Without Borders, because I chair aplatform of very inspirational women who work every single day in the field of peace andsecurity, in particular countering violent extremism.
So the women come from different parts of the country -- from northern Kenya, from thecoastal region, and even here in Nairobi.  And now I engage mentees all towards ensuring wehave a peaceful society.  We empower women from the household level to understandprevention, to understand early warning signs of radicalization of their kids, to look atprevention towards stigma that is associated with those mothers whose kids have actuallyjoined violent extremism, or even their spouses. We also look at empowering them throughsupport groups where they can have a space to engage with other like-minded people andeven learn from each other.
  
And we also ensure that this cross-border engagement between those within northern Kenyaand those within the coastal region so that they don’t feel alone in this whole concept ofviolent extremism.
What is normally important for me is, when it comes to issues of peace and security,engagement with women is still minimal, and we’re still playing catchup.  When we arepushing for two-thirds, even within our own parliamentary systems, we are not looking atwhat these two-thirds will be doing.  And for us, we are pushing towards them having someconcrete things that they will talk about within parliament.  And in particular is the issue ofeducation.  Because for the women in northern Kenya, their children are actually not going toschool; they’re not getting quality education.  And as Hassan has said, this ends up becominga society that has young people who are not well educated and are more susceptible to violentextremism.
Secondly, it’s the issue of the economy.  In places such as the coast region, this has affectedthe economy.  And this trickles down to the household level, and it affects the woman’s oldeconomy within that structure.  So how can we have even this conversation going on?  Andwe try and link this to the national level.
We also ensure that these discussions around policy on prevention has a gender lens. Becausethe reasons why boys join and the reason why girls join is very different.  But when we aresearching for solutions in policy, we try and group them together.  So sometimes, even whenwe are looking at issues of amnesty, we are not really opening up that space to understand ifwe are going to put a rehabilitation center, how do we make it different from when engagingwith a boy and when engaging with a girl.  So that is very critical for us.
One key thing I would love to put across is you started the first -- the conversation -- theWhite House conference in February, and it brought a lot more conversation here through theregional conference we had.  And I wanted to elevate that.  In terms of ensuring it’s moresustainable so that it pushes away from just discussion is to push for a hub that can be placedin Africa.  The hub we have is actually in the UAE, the United Arab Emirates --  which is usefulfor research and ensuring there’s more conversation around how private sector gets involved,how civil society and governments can come together.
But we don’t have such hubs in Africa.  So in most cases, when you hear about capacity-
building of CVE, we have to go outside Africa to get this capacity-building.  So why notactually start thinking about either expanding the global center to have a hub in Kenya, orsomewhere in Africa for easy access for even the grassroots initiatives and civil society to alsobe engaged. 
Thank you.
President Obama:  Thank you.  That was an excellent presentation. Thank you.
  
And I will very much take your remarks under advisement in terms of the possibilities ofsetting up a hub.  The idea of women being actively engaged in countering violent extremismis absolutely critical.  Mothers tend to be more sensible.  I’m just telling the truth.  Andobviously the younger we’re reaching children and giving them the sense that violence is notthe right path, and that’s being reinforced by their primary caregiver, which typically is themother, and the idea of peer-to-peer support but also some peer pressure in terms of makingsure that mothers are involved in steering their children in the right way -- I think that’s awonderful model.  Very exciting.  I just learned something there.
So I’ve got a little bit more time.  What I’d like to do now is I’m just going to call on somepeople.  But I’m not going to be able to call on everybody, so I just want to say in advance.But I’m going to start with this young lady right there, in the sweater.  And please introduceyourself.
Comment:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I am the CEO for Kamak [ph] Girls Initiative. KamakGirls came about because of a problem -- I came from a family that had 45 children; out of it,35 who are living.  Out of the 35, 20 were girls, 15 were boys.  And out of the 20 girls, only11 went to school, four of them up to secondary, and one now up to the PhD level.  So myfather was really for education.  He really tried his best.  But when he passed away in 2004, Irealized as a bigger girl, number three, that I had work to do -- follow these girls who droppedout of school and see that they can live a more meaningful life towards education, health andeconomic development.
So I gathered the four girls who are with me, and we started visiting them and find out howthey are living.  Right now, I managed with my three sisters to take two to the university. Onehas completed and has gotten a job.  One is in third form.  Two to diploma level; one of themwe pushed and we opened at a city school where she was married.  And the other one went toforest school.  And to point, one of them where she was staying, she reached a class 8 andshe has opened an inner-city school.
President Obama:  Excellent.
Comment Continued:  Our next step is to evaluate -- when we evaluate, we get girls of theirrange so that they can see what these girls have done, and also help the girls in the particulararea.
President Obama:  Okay.
Comment Continued:  Yes.  And apart from that, I’ve worked for 34 years, but I’ve not gonevery far because I started building our children from the [inaudible] and I started working andcontinue to.  I have three children. They have not gone very far because I’m taking care ofthese people.
  
So my request is that this group can move further so that whenever these girls are married, Ican -- not only those girls of ours, but also the girls in that area can also see that they can doit.  Thank you so much.  
President Obama:  Okay.  Well, thank you for your good efforts.  
This young lady right there.  I ask everybody to try to be as brief as possible so I can get asmany additional question as possible.
Comment:  Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I am here on behalf of the DevolutionForum.  That’s a civil society coalition that was set up early last year because we were veryconcerned about challenges to the implementation of devolution in Kenya.  And so I’ll speak tojust, very briefly, four points.  I have a more comprehensive memorandum.  
But one is, we’re very concerned about the structure development assistance on devolution. A lot of it is being channeled through the national government to go to the countygovernments, and this is contrary to the constitution which recognizes the two levels ofgovernment as having shared serenity.
Now, this is a ploy by the government to keep power centralized.  It’s really a method ofcontrolling the governance structure.  So we find that even with the U.S., some of yourprograms are being channeled in this way, through the national government, for the countygovernment.  And we find that this is bad for devolution.  We find also the World Bank verymuch is channeling -- they are funding in this direction.
The other thing that I’d like to address is -- to do with the war on terror. We’ve noted that thisan intergovernmental aspect to the war on terror. And because the security reforms have notbeen implemented to the pace that was supposed to be, we find that these intergovernmentalinstitutions, such as the county policing authorities, the community policing, ideologically andeven structurally have not been set up. Ideologically, we find that they are being taken asmore information-gathering rather than community policing where communities get activelyinvolved in their community policing.  So we are very concerned that as the U.S. assists theU.S. government, are you going to look at the ideological foundations of the structures thatwill engage citizens and the country governments in the security process?  Because if we don’tdo that, then it will undermine the war on terror and security.
I’ll pick one more because I --
President Obama:  Because you’re running out of time.
  
Question:  I’m out of time.  There’s a trend in Africa where the civic space is being closed.And we’re looking at countries like Rwanda, Ethiopia.  We’re looking at our country.  Andwe’re wondering, what’s the response of the U.S. government?  We heard your excellentremarks and sentiments, but of course you are working with a government that hasdemonstrated an intent to close the civic space.  So what’s your approach going to be as youconsolidate your work with the Kenyan government in terms of supporting civil society?  We’refinding even support for civil society is not as rigorous as it should have been.  Thank you.
President Obama:  Well, those are all excellent remarks.  Let me just broadly talk aboutdevolution and then we’ll talk about how we are interacting with the national government oncivil society issues.
With respect to devolution, Kenya now has a constitution and it has laid out how devolution issupposed to proceed.  That will be subject to interpretation and legal challenges and politicalarguments.  That’s probably not an issue that the United States will be weighing in on deeply. And the reason I say that is because we have a system of government with a national -- orfederal government, and then state governments and then local governments.  And therelationship between the federal government and the states, the relationship between federallaw and local laws is extremely complicated and has been the source of constant democraticdebate, argument, challenges, court cases.  And that’s been going on for 250 years now.  Imean, that was part of the original issue in the formation of the United States of America  --how much power remained with the states and how much power went to the federalgovernment.
So the challenge that we would have as an international -- or as an outside party as theUnited States of America is that how that plays itself out within Kenya is ultimately up to theKenyan people.  Because there are arguments actually on both sides when it comes tonational versus state power.  In the United States, for example, those who wanted to maintainracial segregation consistently used the argument that states have the right to do what theywant, and the federal government doesn’t have the authority to enforce civil rights laws thatare discriminating against minorities at the state level.
And I actually think, in that situation, the national government needed to say to states thathad segregation laws -- you have to stop.  And national law and the rights of individuals thatare in the bill of rights are superior to whatever challenges -- or whatever claims are beingmade for states’ rights.
Now, on the other hand, there are times where the national government is involving itself instates unnecessarily, and imposing views that may not be properly adapted to the localregion.  
  
So I guess what I’m saying is, is that that’s an issue that’s -- it would be very difficult for usas outsiders to try to figure out.  What we can do is to say, consistent with democracy, youhave a constitution; you should abide by what’s in your constitution.  And you can make yourown decisions about the systems that you want to arrange and the balance between federaland state power, or local power or counties.  And as long as it’s proceeding in a legal processconsistent with the constitution, we’re okay with that.
So I just wanted to be honest, that’s not probably an issue where I’m going to be asking theambassador of the United States to get deeply involved in because it’s just too complicated. Every country is going to be different in terms of finding that balance.
Now, the issue of civil society is different, because we do believe that if you have laws thatrestrict people’s ability to organize and speak out peacefully, and participate in theirgovernment and petition their government -- if those become too restrictive, then that, in anysociety, contradicts the basic premise of democracy.  
And I recognize that there have been some concerns about some of the laws that have eitherbeen proposed or are being interpreted in ways that appear to restrict the legality of certainactivities by certain groups.  Rather than to say specifically what we’re for and against --because frankly, I don’t know all the details -- what I will say is this:  We will look suspiciouslyon laws that say certain peaceful groups can’t operate just because they might be critical ofthe government, for example.  I mean, our bias as a country and in our foreign policy is tosay that if a group is peacefully organizing and advocating for issues, that they should be ableto do so without excessive government interference.  Now, if the groups are violent, thenthat’s a different issue.
But you heard me in my press conference yesterday -- I don’t counterterrorism to be used asan excuse then to crush legitimate dissent.  And we will guard against that as well.  
So we have every intention to work on a whole range of common interests with the Kenyangovernment.  There are areas where we have a complete agreement, and we will workthrough the Kenyan government in order to accomplish those common goals.  We want to behelpful and supportive of the national agenda, but we’ll also be working with NGOs and localorganizations at the local level.  Many of the organizations that area we have been supporting. And what we’ll do is we’ll make sure that in all of our interactions and engagements with thegovernment, when we see an organization, for example, that we have determined is, in fact,legitimate and is peaceful, that it is in some ways being suppressed, we will speak up andwe’ll be very clear about it.  So we’re going to be engaged, we’re going to be involved.  
But as I was telling -- I met with some of the opposition leaders very briefly -- those who arenot in government -- after the speech.  And I told them, you have a legally electedgovernment and we’re going to work with that government, but we’re also always going to belistening to all elements of Kenyan society.
  
It was funny, though -- one of the opposition leaders  -- I won’t mention who -- was saying,you know, we really need you to press the Kenyan government on some issues.  And I had tosay to him, I said, I remember when you were in government --  you kept on saying, why areyou trying to interfere with Kenya’s business; you should mind your own business.  
So everybody wants the United States to be very involved when they’re not in power.  Andwhen they’re in power, they want the United States to mind their own business. 
I think the way that we are going to operate is just to continue to be honest and to promotethe kinds of policies and interests that we believe in.  But ultimately -- and this is probably agood way to close -- ultimately I just want to remind everybody that Kenya’s prosperity, itsfreedom, its opportunity, the strength of its democracy is going to depend on Kenyans.  It’snot going to depend on somebody else.
There was a time, post-Colonial, Cold War, when the big major powers were constantlyinterfering and determining what was happening in other countries.  And frankly, the UnitedStates sometimes was involved in trying to decide who should be in charge of countries.  Butthat honestly has changed.  Our policy is to respect the sovereignty of nations and torecognize that it’s ultimately up to the people of those countries to determine who leads themand their form of government.  But we are not going to apologize for believing in certainvalues and ideals.  And I may interact with a government, out of necessity, where we havecommon interests.  But if there are areas where I disagree, I will also be very blunt in mydisagreement.  And that’s true whether it’s Russia or China, or some of our European friends,or a great friend like Kenya.
The good news is that, over all, the United States and Kenya have so much in common, somuch shared history, such strong people-to-people ties, that the disagreements we have,regardless of who’s in power, tend to be far fewer than all the areas where we have work todo together.
But I’m very encouraged to see that we’ve got such a strong civil society that’s going to helpmove Kenya forward, and also help create a stronger relationship between the United Statesand Kenya for years to come.
So thank you for being here.  This was a great conversation.
