Thank you. Please be seated.
To the families of those we’ve lost; to all who called them friends; to the students of thisuniversity, the public servants who are gathered here, the people of Tucson and the people ofArizona: I have come here tonight as an American who, like all Americans, kneels to pray withyou today and will stand by you tomorrow.
There is nothing I can say that will fill the sudden hole torn in your hearts.  But know this: Thehopes of a nation are here tonight.  We mourn with you for the fallen.  We join you in yourgrief.  And we add our faith to yours that Representative Gabrielle Giffords and the otherliving victims of this tragedy will pull through.
Scripture tells us:
There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God,the holy place where the Most High dwells.God is within her, she will not fall;God will help her at break of day.1
  
On Saturday morning, Gabby, her staff and many of her constituents gathered outside asupermarket to exercise their right to peaceful assembly and free speech. They were fulfillinga central tenet of the democracy envisioned by our founders -- representatives of the peopleanswering questions to their constituents, so as to carry their concerns back to our nation’scapital.  Gabby called it “Congress on Your Corner” -- just an updated version of governmentof and by and for the people.
And that quintessentially American scene, that was the scene that was shattered by agunman’s bullets.  And the six people who lost their lives on Saturday -- they, too,represented what is best in us, what is best in America.
Judge John Roll served our legal system for nearly 40 years. A graduate of this university anda graduate of this law school -- Judge Roll was recommended for the federal bench by JohnMcCain 20 years ago -- appointed by President George H.W. Bush and rose to becomeArizona’s chief federal judge.
His colleagues described him as the hardest-working judge within the Ninth Circuit.  He wason his way back from attending Mass, as he did every day, when he decided to stop by andsay hi to his representative.  John is survived by his loving wife, Maureen, his three sons andhis five beautiful grandchildren.
George and Dorothy Morris -- “Dot” to her friends -- were high school sweethearts who gotmarried and had two daughters.  They did everything together -- traveling the open road intheir RV, enjoying what their friends called a 50-year honeymoon.  Saturday morning, theywent by the Safeway to hear what their congresswoman had to say.  When gunfire rang out,George, a former Marine, instinctively tried to shield his wife.  Both were shot.  Dot passedaway.
A New Jersey native, Phyllis Schneck retired to Tucson to beat the snow.  But in the summer,she would return East, where her world revolved around her three children, her sevengrandchildren and 2-year-old great-granddaughter.  A gifted quilter, she’d often work under afavorite tree, or sometimes she'd sew aprons with the logos of the Jets and the Giants -- togive out at the church where she volunteered.  A Republican, she took a liking to Gabby, andwanted to get to know her better.
Dorwan and Mavy Stoddard grew up in Tucson together -- about 70 years ago.  They movedapart and started their own respective families.  But after both were widowed they found theirway back here, to, as one of Mavy’s daughters put it, “be boyfriend and girlfriend again.”
  
When they weren’t out on the road in their motor home, you could find them just up the road,helping folks in need at the Mountain Avenue Church of Christ.  A retired construction worker,Dorwan spent his spare time fixing up the church along with his dog, Tux.  His final act ofselflessness was to dive on top of his wife, sacrificing his life for hers.
Everything Gabe Zimmerman did, he did with passion.  But his true passion was helpingpeople.  As Gabby’s outreach director, he made the cares of thousands of her constituents hisown, seeing to it that seniors got the Medicare benefits that they had earned, that veteransgot the medals and the care that they deserved, that government was working for ordinaryfolks.  He died doing what he loved -- talking with people and seeing how he could help.  AndGabe is survived by his parents, Ross and Emily, his brother, Ben, and his fiancée, Kelly, whohe planned to marry next year.
And then there is nine-year-old Christina Taylor Green.  Christina was an A student; she was adancer; she was a gymnast; she was a swimmer.  She decided that she wanted to be the firstwoman to play in the Major Leagues, and as the only girl on her Little League team, no oneput it past her.
She showed an appreciation for life uncommon for a girl her age.  She’d remind her mother,“We are so blessed.  We have the best life.”  And she’d pay those blessings back byparticipating in a charity that helped children who were less fortunate.
Our hearts are broken by their sudden passing.  Our hearts are broken -- and yet, our heartsalso have reason for fullness. Our hearts are full of hope and thanks for the 13 Americans whosurvived the shooting, including the congresswoman many of them went to see on Saturday. 
I have just come from the University Medical Center, just a mile from here, where our friendGabby courageously fights to recover even as we speak.  And I want to tell you -- herhusband Mark is here and he allows me to share this with you -- right after we went to visit, afew minutes after we left her room and some of her colleagues in Congress were in the room,Gabby opened her eyes for the first time. Gabby opened her eyes for the first time.
Gabby opened her eyes.  Gabby opened her eyes, so I can tell you she knows we are here. She knows we love her.  And she knows that we are rooting for her through what isundoubtedly going to be a difficult journey.  We are there for her.
Our hearts are full of thanks for that good news, and our hearts are full of gratitude for thosewho saved others.  We are grateful to Daniel Hernandez -- a volunteer in Gabby’s office. And,Daniel, I’m sorry, you may deny it, but we’ve decided you are a hero because you ran throughthe chaos to minister to your boss, and tended to her wounds and helped keep her alive.
  
We are grateful to the men who tackled the gunman as he stopped to reload.  Right overthere.  We are grateful for petite Patricia Maisch, who wrestled away the killer’s ammunition,and undoubtedly saved some lives. And we are grateful for the doctors and nurses and firstresponders who worked wonders to heal those who’d been hurt.  We are grateful to them.
These men and women remind us that heroism is found not only on the fields of battle.  Theyremind us that heroism does not require special training or physical strength.  Heroism ishere, in the hearts of so many of our fellow citizens, all around us, just waiting to besummoned -- as it was on Saturday morning. Their actions, their selflessness poses achallenge to each of us.  It raises a question of what, beyond prayers and expressions ofconcern, is required of us going forward.  How can we honor the fallen?  How can we be trueto their memory?
You see, when a tragedy like this strikes, it is part of our nature to demand explanations -- totry and pose some order on the chaos and make sense out of that which seems senseless. Already we’ve seen a national conversation commence, not only about the motivations behindthese killings, but about everything from the merits of gun safety laws to the adequacy of ourmental health system.  And much of this process, of debating what might be done to preventsuch tragedies in the future, is an essential ingredient in our exercise of self-government.
But at a time when our discourse has become so sharply polarized -- at a time when we arefar too eager to lay the blame for all that ails the world at the feet of those who happen tothink differently than we do -- it’s important for us to pause for a moment and make sure thatwe’re talking with each other in a way that heals, not in a way that wounds.
Scripture tells us that there is evil in the world, and that terrible things happen for reasonsthat defy human understanding. In the words of Job, “When I looked for light, then camedarkness.”  Bad things happen, and we have to guard against simple explanations in theaftermath.
For the truth is none of us can know exactly what triggered this vicious attack.  None of uscan know with any certainty what might have stopped these shots from being fired, or whatthoughts lurked in the inner recesses of a violent man’s mind.  Yes, we have to examine allthe facts behind this tragedy.  We cannot and will not be passive in the face of such violence. We should be willing to challenge old assumptions in order to lessen the prospects of suchviolence in the future. But what we cannot do is use this tragedy as one more occasion to turnon each other. That we cannot do.  That we cannot do.
As we discuss these issues, let each of us do so with a good dose of humility.  Rather thanpointing fingers or assigning blame, let’s use this occasion to expand our moral imaginations,to listen to each other more carefully, to sharpen our instincts for empathy and remindourselves of all the ways that our hopes and dreams are bound together.
  
After all, that’s what most of us do when we lose somebody in our family -- especially if theloss is unexpected.  We’re shaken out of our routines.  We’re forced to look inward.  Wereflect on the past:  Did we spend enough time with an aging parent, we wonder.  Did weexpress our gratitude for all the sacrifices that they made for us?  Did we tell a spouse justhow desperately we loved them, not just once in a while but every single day?
So sudden loss causes us to look backward. But it also forces us to look forward; to reflect onthe present and the future, on the manner in which we live our lives and nurture ourrelationships with those who are still with us.
We may ask ourselves if we’ve shown enough kindness and generosity and compassion to thepeople in our lives.  Perhaps we question whether we're doing right by our children, or ourcommunity, whether our priorities are in order.
We recognize our own mortality, and we are reminded that in the fleeting time we have onthis Earth, what matters is not wealth, or status, or power, or fame -- but rather, how well wehave loved -- and what small part we have played in making the lives of other people better.
And that process -- that process of reflection, of making sure we align our values with ouractions -- I believe, is what a tragedy like this requires. 
For those who were harmed, those who were killed -- they are part of our family, an Americanfamily 300 million strong. We may not have known them personally, but surely we seeourselves in them.  In George and Dot, in Dorwan and Mavy, we sense the abiding love wehave for our own husbands, our own wives, our own life partners.  Phyllis -- she’s our mom orour grandma; Gabe our brother or son. In Judge Roll, we recognize not only a man who prizedhis family and doing his job well, but also a man who embodied America’s fidelity to the law.
And in Gabby, we see a reflection of our public-spiritedness; that desire to participate in thatsometimes frustrating, sometimes contentious, but always necessary and never-endingprocess to form a more perfect union. And in Christina we see all of our children. So curious,so trusting, so energetic, so full of magic.  So deserving of our love.  And so deserving of ourgood example. 
If this tragedy prompts reflection and debate -- as it should -- let’s make sure it’s worthy ofthose we have lost. Let’s make sure it’s not on the usual plane of politics and point-scoringand pettiness that drifts away in the next news cycle.
The loss of these wonderful people should make every one of us strive to be better.  To bebetter in our private lives, to be better friends and neighbors and coworkers and parents. Andif, as has been discussed in recent days, their death helps usher in more civility in our publicdiscourse, let us remember it is not because a simple lack of civility caused this tragedy -- itdid not -- but rather because only a more civil and honest public discourse can help us face upto the challenges of our nation in a way that would make them proud.
  
We should be civil because we want to live up to the example of public servants like John Rolland Gabby Giffords, who knew first and foremost that we are all Americans, and that we canquestion each other’s ideas without questioning each other’s love of country and that our task,working together, is to constantly widen the circle of our concern so that we bequeath theAmerican Dream to future generations.
They believed, and I believe that we can be better.  Those who died here, those who savedlife here -- they help me believe.  We may not be able to stop all evil in the world, but I knowthat how we treat one another, that’s entirely up to us. And I believe that for all ourimperfections, we are full of decency and goodness, and that the forces that divide us are notas strong as those that unite us.  That’s what I believe, in part because that’s what a child likeChristina Taylor Green believed.
Imagine for a moment, here was a young girl who was just becoming aware of ourdemocracy; just beginning to understand the obligations of citizenship; just starting toglimpse the fact that some day she, too, might play a part in shaping her nation’s future.  Shehad been elected to her student council.  She saw public service as something exciting andhopeful.  She was off to meet her congresswoman, someone she was sure was good andimportant and might be a role model.  She saw all this through the eyes of a child, undimmedby the cynicism or vitriol that we adults all too often just take for granted.
I want to live up to her expectations. I want our democracy to be as good as Christinaimagined it.  I want America to be as good as she imagined it.  All of us -- we should doeverything we can to make sure this country lives up to our children’s expectations.
As has already been mentioned, Christina was given to us on September 11th, 2001, one of50 babies born that day to be pictured in a book called “Faces of Hope.”  On either side of herphoto in that book were simple wishes for a child’s life.  “I hope you help those in need,” readone.  “I hope you know all the words to the National Anthem and sing it with your hand overyour heart." "I hope you jump in rain puddles.”
If there are rain puddles in Heaven, Christina is jumping in them today.  And here on thisEarth, we place our hands over our hearts, and we commit ourselves as Americans to forginga country that is forever worthy of her gentle, happy spirit.
May God bless and keep those we’ve lost in restful and eternal peace.
May He love and watch over the survivors.
And may He bless the United States of America.
1 Psalms 46:4-5
