Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Friday.  I thought I’d take some questions, but first, letme say a few words about the economy.
This morning, we learned that our economy created over 200,000 new jobs in July.  That’s ontop of about 300,000 new jobs in June.  So we are now in a six-month streak with at least200,000 new jobs each month.  That's the first time that has happened since 1997.  Over thepast year, we’ve added more jobs than any year since 2006.  And all told, our businesseshave created 9.9 million new jobs over the past 53 months.  That's the longest streak ofprivate sector job creation in our history. 
And as we saw on Wednesday, the economy grew at a strong pace in the spring.  Companiesare investing.  Consumers are spending.  American manufacturing, energy, technology, autos-- all are booming.  And thanks to the decisions that we’ve made, and the grit and resilienceof the American people, we’ve recovered faster and come farther from the recession thanalmost any other advanced country on Earth. 
  
So the good news is the economy clearly is getting stronger. Things are getting better.  Ourengines are revving a little bit louder.  And the decisions that we make right now can sustainand keep that growth and momentum going.
Unfortunately, there are a series of steps that we could be taking to maintain momentum, andperhaps even accelerate it; there are steps that we could be taking that would result in morejob growth, higher wages, higher incomes, more relief for middle-class families.  And so far,at least, in Congress, we have not seen them willing or able to take those steps.
I've been pushing for common-sense ideas like rebuilding our infrastructure in ways that aresustained over many years and support millions of good jobs and help businesses compete. I've been advocating on behalf of raising the minimum wage, making it easier for workingfolks to pay off their student loans; fair pay, paid leave.  All these policies have two things incommon:  All of them would help working families feel more stable and secure, and all ofthem so far have been blocked or ignored by Republicans in Congress.  That’s why myadministration keeps taking whatever actions we can take on our own to help workingfamilies. 
Now, it’s good that Congress was able to pass legislation to strengthen the VA.  And I want tothank the chairmen and ranking members who were involved in that.  It's good that Congresswas able to at least fund transportation projects for a few more months before leaving town --although it falls far short of the kind of infrastructure effort that we need that would actuallyaccelerate the economy.  But for the most part, the big-ticket items, the things that wouldreally make a difference in the lives of middle-class families, those things just are not gettingdone. 
Let’s just take a recent example:  Immigration.  We all agree that there’s a problem thatneeds to be solved in a portion of our southern border.  And we even agree on most of thesolutions.  But instead of working together -- instead of focusing on the 80 percent wherethere is agreement between Democrats and Republicans, between the administration andCongress -- House Republicans, as we speak, are trying to pass the most extreme andunworkable versions of a bill that they already know is going nowhere, that can't pass theSenate and that if it were to pass the Senate I would veto.  They know it. 
They’re not even trying to actually solve the problem.  This is a message bill that they couldn'tquite pull off yesterday, so they made it a little more extreme so maybe they can pass ittoday -- just so they can check a box before they’re leaving town for a month.  And this is onan issue that they all insisted had to be a top priority.   
Now, our efforts administratively so far have helped to slow the tide of child migrants trying tocome to our country.  But without additional resources and help from Congress, we're just notgoing to have the resources we need to fully solve the problem.  That means while they’re outon vacation I'm going to have to make some tough choices to meet the challenge -- with orwithout Congress. 
  
And yesterday, even though they’ve been sitting on a bipartisan immigration bill for over ayear, House Republicans suggested that since they don't expect to actually pass a bill that Ican sign, that I actually should go ahead and act on my own to solve the problem.  Keep inmind that just a few days earlier, they voted to sue me for acting on my own.  And then whenthey couldn’t pass a bill yesterday, they put out a statement suggesting I should act on myown because they couldn't pass a bill.
So immigration has not gotten done.  A student loan bill that would help folks who havestudent loan debt consolidate and refinance at lower rates -- that didn’t pass.  Thetransportation bill that they did pass just gets us through the spring, when we should actuallybe planning years in advance.  States and businesses are raising the minimum wage for theirworkers because this Congress is failing to do so. 
Even basic things like approving career diplomats for critical ambassadorial posts aren'tgetting done.  Last night, for purely political reasons, Senate Republicans, for a certain periodof time, blocked our new ambassador to Russia.  It raised such an uproar that finally theywent ahead and let our Russian ambassador pass -- at a time when we are dealing every daywith the crisis in Ukraine.
They’re still blocking our ambassador to Sierra Leone, where there’s currently an Ebolaoutbreak.  They’re blocking our ambassador to Guatemala, even as they demand that we domore to stop the flow of unaccompanied children from Guatemala.  There are a lot of thingsthat we could be arguing about on policy -- that's what we should be doing as a democracy --but we shouldn’t be having an argument about placing career diplomats with bipartisansupport in countries around the world where we have to have a presence.
So the bottom line is this:  We have come a long way over the last five and a half years.  Ourchallenges are nowhere near as daunting as they were when I first came into office.  But theAmerican people demand and deserve a strong and focused effort on the part of all of us tokeep moving the country forward and to focus on their concerns.  And the fact is we could bemuch further along and we could be doing even better, and the economy could be evenstronger, and more jobs could be created if Congress would do the job that the people sentthem here to do.
And I will not stop trying to work with both parties to get things moving faster for middle-
class families and those trying to get into the middle class.  When Congress returns nextmonth, my hope is, is that instead of simply trying to pass partisan message bills on partylines that don't actually solve problems, they’re going to be willing to come together to atleast focus on some key areas where there’s broad agreement.  After all that we've had toovercome, our Congress should stop standing in the way of our country’s success.  
So with that, let me take a couple of questions.  And I will start with Roberta Rampton ofReuters.
  
Question:  Thanks.  I want to ask about the situation in the Middle East.  And why do youthink Israel should embrace a cease-fire in Gaza when one of its soldiers appears to havebeen abducted and when Hamas continues to use its network of tunnels to launch attacks? And also, have you seen Israel act at all on your call to do more to protect civilians?
President Obama:  Well, first of all, I think it's important to note that we have -- and I have-- unequivocally condemned Hamas and the Palestinian factions that were responsible forkilling two Israeli soldiers and abducting a third almost minutes after a cease-fire had beenannounced.  And the U.N. has condemned them as well.
And I want to make sure that they are listening:  If they are serious about trying to resolvethis situation, that soldier needs to be unconditionally released as soon as possible. 
I have been very clear throughout this crisis that Israel has a right to defend itself.  Nocountry can tolerate missiles raining down on its cities and people having to rush to bombshelters every 20 minutes or half hour.  No country can or would tolerate tunnels being dugunder their land that can be used to launch terrorist attacks.
And so, not only have we been supportive of Israel in its right to defend itself, but in veryconcrete terms -- for example, in support for the Iron Dome program that has interceptedrockets that are firing down on Israeli cities -- we've been trying to cooperate as much as wecan to make sure that Israel is able to protect its citizens.
Now, at the same time, we've also been clear that innocent civilians in Gaza caught in thecrossfire have to weigh on our conscience and we have to do more to protect them.  A cease-
fire was one way in which we could stop the killing, to step back and to try to resolve some ofthe underlying issues that have been building up over quite some time.  Israel committed tothat 72-hour cease-fire, and it was violated.  And trying to put that back together is going tobe challenging, but we will continue to make those efforts.
And let me take this opportunity, by the way, to give Secretary John Kerry credit.  He hasbeen persistent.  He has worked very hard.  He has endured on many occasions really unfaircriticism simply to try to get to the point where the killing stops and the underlying issuesabout Israel’s security but also the concerns of Palestinians in Gaza can be addressed.
We're going to keep working towards that.  It's going to take some time.  I think it's going tobe very hard to put a cease-fire back together again if Israelis and the internationalcommunity can't feel confident that Hamas can follow through on a cease-fire commitment.
And it's not particularly relevant whether a particular leader in Hamas ordered this abduction. The point is, is that when they sign onto a cease-fire they’re claiming to speak for all thePalestinian factions.  And if they don't have control of them, and just moments after a cease-
fire is signed you have Israeli soldiers being killed and captured, then it's hard for the Israelisto feel confident that a cease-fire can actually be honored.
  
I'm in constant consultation with Prime Minister Netanyahu. Our national security team is inconstant communication with the Israel military.  I want to see everything possible done tomake sure that Palestinian civilians are not being killed.  And it is heartbreaking to see what’shappening there, and I think many of us recognize the dilemma we have.  On the one hand,Israel has a right to defend itself and it's got to be able to get at those rockets and thosetunnel networks.  On the other hand, because of the incredibly irresponsible actions on thepart of Hamas to oftentimes house these rocket launchers right in the middle of civilianneighborhoods, we end up seeing people who had nothing to do with these rockets ending upbeing hurt.
Part of the reason why we've been pushing so hard for a cease-fire is precisely because it'shard to reconcile Israel’s legitimate need to defend itself with our concern with those civilians. And if we can pause the fighting, then it's possible that we may be able to arrive at a formulathat spares lives and also ensures Israel’s security.  But it's difficult.  And I don't think weshould pretend otherwise.
Bill Plante.
Question:  Mr. President, like that cease-fire, you’ve called for diplomatic solutions not onlyin Israel and Gaza but also in Ukraine, in Iraq, to very little effect so far.  Has the UnitedStates of America lost its influence in the world?  Have you lost yours?
President Obama:  Look, this is a common theme that folks bring up.  Apparently peoplehave forgotten that America, as the most powerful country on Earth, still does not controleverything around the world.  And so our diplomatic efforts often take time. They often willsee progress and then a step backwards.  That’s been true in the Middle East.  That’s beentrue in Europe.  That’s been true in Asia.  That’s the nature of world affairs.  It’s not neat, andit’s not smooth.
But if you look at, for example, Ukraine, we have made progress in delivering on what we saidwe would do.  We can’t control how Mr. Putin thinks.  But what we can do is say to Mr. Putin,if you continue on the path of arming separatists with heavy armaments that the evidencesuggests may have resulted in 300 innocent people on a jet dying, and that violatesinternational law and undermines the integrity -- territorial integrity and sovereignty ofUkraine, then you’re going to face consequences that will hurt your country.
And there was a lot of skepticism about our ability to coordinate with Europeans for a strongseries of sanctions.  And each time we have done what we said we would do, including thisweek, when we put in place sanctions that have an impact on key sectors of the Russianeconomy -- their energy, their defense, their financial systems.
It hasn’t resolved the problem yet.  I spoke to Mr. Putin this morning, and I indicated to him,just as we will do what we say we do in terms of sanctions, we’ll also do what we say we do interms of wanting to resolve this issue diplomatically if he takes a different position.
  
If he respects and honors the right of Ukrainians to determine their own destiny, then it’spossible to make sure that Russian interests are addressed that are legitimate, and thatUkrainians are able to make their own decisions, and we can resolve this conflict and endsome of the bloodshed.
But the point is, though, Bill, that if you look at the 20th century and the early part of thiscentury, there are a lot of conflicts that America doesn’t resolve.  That’s always been true. That doesn’t mean we stop trying.  And it’s not a measure of American influence on any givenday or at any given moment that there are conflicts around the world that are difficult.  Theconflict in Northern Ireland raged for a very, very long time until finally something broke,where the parties decided that it wasn’t worth killing each other.
The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been going on even longer than you’ve been reporting. And I don’t think at any point was there a suggestion somehow that America didn’t haveinfluence just because we weren’t able to finalize an Israeli-Palestinian peace deal. 
You will recall that situations like Kosovo and Bosnia raged on for quite some time, and therewas a lot more death and bloodshed than there has been so far in the Ukrainian situationbefore it ultimately did get resolved.
And so I recognize with so many different issues popping up around the world, sometimes itmay seem as if this is an aberration or it’s unusual.  But the truth of the matter is, is thatthere’s a big world out there, and that as indispensable as we are to try to lead it, there’s stillgoing to be tragedies out there and there are going to be conflicts.  And our job is to justmake sure that we continue to project what’s right, what’s just, and that we’re buildingcoalitions of like-minded countries and partners in order to advance not only our core securityinterests but also the interests of the world as a whole.
Question:  Do you think you could have done more?
President Obama:  On which one?
Question:  On any of them?  Ukraine?
President Obama:  Well look, I think, Bill, that the nature of being President is that you’realways asking yourself what more can you do.  But with respect to, let’s say, the Israeli-
Palestinian issue, this administration invested an enormous amount to try to bring the partiestogether around a framework for peace and a two-state solution.  John Kerry invested anenormous amount of time.  In the end, it’s up to the two parties to make a decision.  We canlead them to resolve some of the technical issues and to show them a path, but they’ve got towant it. 
  
With respect to Ukraine, I think that we have done everything that we can to support theUkrainian government and to deter Russia from moving further into Ukraine.  But short ofgoing to war, there are going to be some constraints in terms of what we can do if PresidentPutin and Russia are ignoring what should be their long-term interests. 
Right now, what we’ve done is impose sufficient costs on Russia that, objectively speaking,they should -- President Putin should want to resolve this diplomatically, get these sanctionslifted, get their economy growing again, and have good relations with Ukraine.  Butsometimes people don’t always act rationally, and they don’t always act based on theirmedium- or long-term interests.  That can’t deter us, though.  We’ve just got to stay at it. 
Wendell.
Question:  Mr. President, Republicans point to some of your executive orders as reason, theysay, that they can’t trust you to implement legislation that they pass.  Even if you don’t buythat argument, do you hold yourself totally blameless in the inability it appears to reachagreement with the Republican-led House?
President Obama:  Wendell, let’s just take the recent example of immigration.  A bipartisanbill passed out of the Senate, co-sponsored by not just Democrats but some very conservativeRepublicans who recognize that the system currently is broken and if, in fact we put moreresources on the border, provide a path in which those undocumented workers who’ve beenliving here for a long time and may have ties here are coming out of the shadows, payingtheir taxes, paying a fine, learning English -- if we fix the legal immigration system so it’smore efficient, if we are attracting young people who may have studied here to stay here andcreate jobs here, that that all is going to be good for the economy, it’s going to reduce thedeficit, it might have forestalled some of the problems that we’re seeing now in the RioGrande Valley with these unaccompanied children.
And so we have a bipartisan bill, Wendell, bipartisan agreement supported by everybody fromlabor to the evangelical community to law enforcement.  So the argument isn’t between meand the House Republicans.  It’s between the House Republicans and Senate Republicans, andHouse Republicans and the business community, and House Republicans and the evangelicalcommunity.  I’m just one of the people they seem to disagree with on this issue.
So that’s on the comprehensive bill.  So now we have a short-term crisis with respect to theRio Grande Valley.  They say we need more resources, we need tougher border security in thisarea where these unaccompanied children are showing up.  We agree.  So we put forward asupplemental to give us the additional resources and funding to do exactly what they say weshould be doing, and they can’t pass the bill.  They can’t even pass their own version of thebill.  So that’s not a disagreement between me and the House Republicans; that’s adisagreement between the House Republicans and the House Republicans. 
  
The point is that on a range of these issues, whether it’s tax reform, whether it’s reducing thedeficit, whether it’s rebuilding our infrastructure, we have consistently put forward proposalsthat in previous years and previous administrations would not have been considered radical orleft wing; they would have been considered pretty sensible, mainstream approaches to solvingproblems. 
I include under that, by the way, the Affordable Care Act.  That’s a whole other conversation.
And in circumstances where even basic, common-sense, plain, vanilla legislation can’t passbecause House Republicans consider it somehow a compromise of their principles, or givingObama a victory, then we’ve got to take action.  Otherwise, we’re not going to be makingprogress on the things that the American people care about.
Question:  On the border supplemental -- can you act alone?
President Obama:  Well, I’m going to have to act alone because we don’t have enoughresources.  We’ve already been very clear -- we’ve run out of money.  And we are going tohave to reallocate resources in order to just make sure that some of the basic functions thathave to take place down there -- whether it’s making sure that these children are properlyhoused, or making sure we’ve got enough immigration judges to process their cases  -- thatthose things get done.  We’re going to have to reallocate some resources.
But the broader point, Wendell, is that if, in fact, House Republicans are concerned about meacting independently of Congress -- despite the fact that I’ve taken fewer executive actionsthan my Republican predecessor or my Democratic predecessor before that, or the Republicanpredecessor before that -- then the easiest way to solve it is passing legislation. Get thingsdone.
On the supplemental, we agreed on 80 percent of the issues. There were 20 percent of theissues that perhaps there were disagreements between Democrats and Republicans.  As I saidto one Republican colleague who was down here that I was briefing about some nationalsecurity issues, why wouldn’t we just go ahead and pass the 80 percent that we agree on andwe’ll try to work to resolve the differences on the other 20 percent?  Why wouldn’t we dothat?  And he didn't really have a good answer for it.
So there’s no doubt that I can always do better on everything, including making additionalcalls to Speaker Boehner, and having more conversations with some of the House Republicanleadership.  But in the end, the challenge I have right now is that they are not able to acteven on what they say their priorities are, and they're not able to work and compromise evenwith Senate Republicans on certain issues.  And they consider what have been traditionallyRepublican-supported initiatives, they consider those as somehow a betrayal of the cause.
  
Take the example of the Export-Import Bank.  This is an interesting thing that's happened. This is a program in which we help to provide financing to sell American goods and productsaround the world.  Every country does this.  It’s traditionally been championed byRepublicans.  For some reason, right now the House Republicans have decided that weshouldn’t do this -- which means that when American companies go overseas and they'retrying to close a sale on selling Boeing planes, for example, or a GE turbine, or some otherAmerican product, that has all kinds of subcontractors behind it and is creating all kinds ofjobs, and all sorts of small businesses depend on that sale, and that American company isgoing up against a German company or a Chinese company, and the Chinese and the Germancompany are providing financing and the American company isn’t, we may lose that sale. 
When did that become something that Republicans opposed?  It would be like me having a cardealership for Ford, and the Toyota dealership offers somebody financing and I don't.  We willlose business and we’ll lose jobs if we don’t pass it. 
So there’s some big issues where I understand why we have differences.  On taxes,Republicans want to maintain some corporate loopholes I think need to be closed because Ithink that we should be giving tax breaks to families that are struggling with child care ortrying to save for a college education.  On health care, obviously their view is, is that weshould not be helping folks get health care, even though it’s through the private marketplace. My view is, is that in a country as wealthy as ours, we can afford to make sure that everybodyhas access to affordable care. 
Those are legitimate policy arguments.  But getting our ambassadors confirmed?  These arecareer diplomats, not political types.  Making sure that we pass legislation to strengthen ourborders and put more folks down there?  Those shouldn’t be controversial.  And I think you’dbe hard-pressed to find an example of where I wouldn’t welcome some reasonable efforts toactually get a bill passed out of Congress that I could sign. 
Last question, Michelle Kosinski.
Question:  You made the point that in certain difficult conflicts in the past, both sides had toreach a point where they were tired of the bloodshed.  Do you think that we are actually farfrom that point right now?  And is it realistic to try to broker a cease-fire right now when thereare still tunnel operations allowed to continue?  Is that going to cause a change of approachfrom this point forward?
President Obama:  Well, keep in mind that the cease-fire that had been agreed to wouldhave given Israel the capability to continue to dismantle these tunnel networks, but theIsraelis can dismantle these tunnel networks without going into major population centers inGaza.  So I think the Israelis are entirely right that these tunnel networks need to bedismantled.  There is a way of doing that while still reducing the bloodshed.
  
You are right that in past conflicts, sometimes people have to feel deeply the costs.  Anybodywho has been watching some of these images I’d like to think should recognize the costs.  Youhave children who are getting killed.  You have women, defenseless, who are getting killed. You have Israelis whose lives are disrupted constantly and living in fear.  And those are coststhat are avoidable if we’re able to get a cease-fire that preserves Israel’s ability to defenditself and gives it the capacity to have an assurance that they’re not going to be constantlythreatened by rocket fire in the future, and, conversely, an agreement that recognizes thePalestinian need to be able to make a living and the average Palestinian’s capacity to live adecent life.
But it’s hard.  It’s going to be hard to get there.  I think that there’s a lot of anger and there’sa lot of despair, and that’s a volatile mix.  But we have to keep trying. 
And it is -- Bill asked earlier about American leadership.  Part of the reason why Americaremains indispensable, part of the essential ingredient in American leadership is that we’rewilling to plunge in and try, where other countries don’t bother trying.  I mean, the fact of thematter is, is that in all these crises that have been mentioned, there may be some tangentialrisks to the United States.  In some cases, as in Iraq and ISIS, those are dangers that have tobe addressed right now, and we have to take them very seriously.  But for the most part,these are not -- the rockets aren’t being fired into the United States.  The reason we areconcerned is because we recognize we’ve got some special responsibilities. 
We have to have some humility about what we can and can’t accomplish.  We have torecognize that our resources are finite, and we’re coming out of a decade of war and ourmilitary has been stretched very hard, as has our budget.  Nevertheless, we try.  We go inthere and we make an effort.
And when I see John Kerry going out there and trying to broker a cease-fire, we should all besupporting him.  There shouldn’t be a bunch of complaints and second-guessing about, well, ithasn’t happened yet, or nitpicking before he’s had a chance to complete his efforts.  Because,I tell you what, there isn’t any other country that’s going in there and making those efforts. 
And more often than not, as a consequence of our involvement, we get better outcomes -- notperfect outcomes, not immediate outcomes, but we get better outcomes.  And that’s going tobe true with respect to the Middle East.  That’s going to be true with respect to Ukraine. That’s going to be certainly true with respect to Iraq.
And I think it’s useful for me to end by just reminding folks that, in my first term, if I had apress conference like this, typically, everybody would want to ask about the economy and howcome jobs weren’t being created, and how come the housing market is still bad, and why isn’tit working.  Well, you know what, what we did worked.  And the economy is better.  And whenI say that we’ve just had six months of more than 200,000 jobs that hasn’t happened in 17years that shows you the power of persistence.  It shows you that if you stay at it, eventuallywe make some progress.  All right?
  
Question:  What about John Brennan?
Question:  The Africa summit -- Ebola?
President Obama:  I thought that you guys were going to ask me how I was going to spendmy birthday.  What happened to the happy birthday thing?
Statement:  Happy birthday.
Question:  What about John Brennan?
Question:  Africa summit?
President Obama:  I will address two points.  I’ll address --
Question:  And Flight 17?
President Obama:  Hold on, guys.  Come on.  There’s just --
Question:  And Africa.
President Obama:  You're not that pent up.  I’ve been giving you questions lately.
On Brennan and the CIA, the RDI report has been transmitted, the declassified version thatwill be released at the pleasure of the Senate committee. 
I have full confidence in John Brennan.  I think he has acknowledged and directly apologizedto Senator Feinstein that CIA personnel did not properly handle an investigation as to howcertain documents that were not authorized to be released to the Senate staff got somehowinto the hands of the Senate staff.  And it’s clear from the IG report that some very poorjudgment was shown in terms of how that was handled.  Keep in mind, though, that JohnBrennan was the person who called for the IG report, and he’s already stood up a task forceto make sure that lessons are learned and mistakes are resolved.
With respect to the larger point of the RDI report itself, even before I came into office I wasvery clear that in the immediate aftermath of 9/11 we did some things that were wrong.  Wedid a whole lot of things that were right, but we tortured some folks.  We did some things thatwere contrary to our values. 
I understand why it happened. I think it’s important when we look back to recall how afraidpeople were after the Twin Towers fell and the Pentagon had been hit and the plane inPennsylvania had fallen, and people did not know whether more attacks were imminent, andthere was enormous pressure on our law enforcement and our national security teams to try
  
to deal with this.  And it’s important for us not to feel too sanctimonious in retrospect aboutthe tough job that those folks had.  And a lot of those folks were working hard underenormous pressure and are real patriots. 
But having said all that, we did some things that were wrong.  And that's what that reportreflects.  And that's the reason why, after I took office, one of the first things I did was to bansome of the extraordinary interrogation techniques that are the subject of that report.
And my hope is, is that this report reminds us once again that the character of our countryhas to be measured in part not by what we do when things are easy, but what we do whenthings are hard.  And when we engaged in some of these enhanced interrogation techniques,techniques that I believe and I think any fair-minded person would believe were torture, wecrossed a line.  And that needs to be -- that needs to be understood and accepted.  And wehave to, as a country, take responsibility for that so that, hopefully, we don't do it again in thefuture.
Question:  Mr. President --
President Obama:  Now, I gave you a question.
Statement:  All right.
Question:  The summit -- the U.S.-Africa --
President Obama:  We’ve got a U.S.-Africa Summit coming up next week.  It is going to bean unprecedented gathering of African leaders.  The importance of this for America needs tobe understood.  Africa is one of the fastest-growing continents in the world.  You’ve got six ofthe 10 fastest-growing economies in Africa.  You have all sorts of other countries like Chinaand Brazil and India deeply interested in working with Africa -- not to extract naturalresources alone, which traditionally has been the relationship between Africa and the rest ofthe world -- but now because Africa is growing and you’ve got thriving markets and you’ve gotentrepreneurs and extraordinary talent among the people there. 
And Africa also happens to be one of the continents where America is most popular andpeople feel a real affinity for our way of life.  And we’ve made enormous progress over thelast several years in not just providing traditional aid to Africa, helping countries that aresuffering from malnutrition or helping countries that are suffering from AIDS, but ratherpartnering and thinking about how can we trade more and how can we do business together. And that’s the kind of relationship that Africa is looking for. 
And I’ve had conversations over the last several months with U.S. businesses -- some of thebiggest U.S. businesses in the world -- and they say, Africa, that’s one of our top priorities;we want to do business with those folks, and we think that we can create U.S. jobs and sendU.S. exports to Africa.
  
But we’ve got to be engaged, and so this gives us a chance to do that.  It also gives us achance to talk to Africa about security issues -- because, as we’ve seen, terrorist networks tryto find places where governance is weak and security structures are weak.  And if we want tokeep ourselves safe over the long term, then one of the things that we can do is make surethat we are partnering with some countries that really have pretty effective security forcesand have been deploying themselves in peacekeeping and conflict resolution efforts in Africa. And that, ultimately, can save us and our troops and our military a lot of money if we’ve gotstrong partners who are able to deal with conflicts in these regions. 
So it’s going to be a terrific conference.  I won’t lie to you, traffic will be bad here inWashington.  I know that everybody has been warned about that, but we are really lookingforward to this and I think it’s going to be a great success. 
Now, the last thing I’m going to say about this, because I know that it’s been on people’sminds, is the issue of Ebola.  This is something that we take very seriously.  As soon asthere’s an outbreak anywhere in the world of any disease that could have significant effects,the CDC is in communication with the World Health Organization and other multilateralagencies to try to make sure that we’ve got an appropriate response.
This has been a more aggressive Ebola outbreak than we’ve seen in the past.  But keep inmind that it is still affecting parts of three countries, and we’ve got some 50 countriesrepresented at this summit.  We are doing two things with respect to the summit itself.  We’retaking the appropriate precautions.  Folks who are coming from these countries that haveeven a marginal risk or an infinitesimal risk of having been exposed in some fashion, we’remaking sure we’re doing screening on that end -- as they leave the country.  We’ll doadditional screening when they’re here.  We feel confident that the procedures that we’ve putin place are appropriate. 
More broadly, the CDC and our various health agencies are going to be working very intentlywith the World Health Organization and some of our partner countries to make sure that wecan surge some resources down there and organization to these countries that are pretty poorand don’t have a strong public health infrastructure so that we can start containing theproblem.
Keep in mind that Ebola is not something that is easily transmitted.  That’s why, generally,outbreaks dissipate.  But the key is identifying, quarantining, isolating those who contract itand making sure that practices are in place that avoid transmission.  And it can be done, butit’s got to be done in an organized, systematic way, and that means that we’re going to haveto help these countries accomplish that. 
All right?  Okay. 
Question:  Happy Birthday, Mr. President.
  
President Obama:  There you go, April.  That’s what I was talking about -- somebody finallywished me happy birthday -- although it isn’t until Monday, you’re right. 
Thank you so much.
