Good evening, everybody.  I just met with my National Security Council as part of our regulareffort to review and intensify our campaign to destroy ISIL.  I want to thank Secretary Kerryfor hosting us and for his leadership of American diplomacy, not only in the Middle East butaround the world.  Secretary Carter and Chairman Dunford updated us on our militarycampaign, and Brett McGurk, my special envoy to our coalition, helped lead a review of ouroverall strategy.   At the outset, I want to say, again, that this remains a difficult fight.  The situation in Syriaand Iraq is one of the most complex the world has seen in recent times.  ISIL is entrenched,including in urban areas, using innocent civilians as human shields.  Even in places where ISILhas been driven out, it leaves behind utter devastation -- communities in ruin that need to bestabilized and rebuilt, which will take years and tremendous international resources, because,certainly in Iraq, they’re hard-pressed to come up with everything that they need to rebuild,and in Syria, the regime there still is not constituted in such a way that it is investing incivilian populations. Countries, communities and groups that agree on fighting ISIL in the short term often don’tagree on broader, long-term goals.  Indeed, the fight in Syria is not only a civil war, but it’salso a proxy war between regional powers, reflecting deep sectarian and political rivalries.Russia’s intervention and airstrikes have reinforced the Assad regime and made ahumanitarian catastrophe even worse.  And the entire world has been horrified by images ofstarving Syrians -- including children -- reduced to near skeletons.
  
 So this is a tough situation with a lot of moving parts.  And as a consequence, I want to thankJohn for his tireless efforts, along with his team, to reach a cessation of hostilities in the civilwar.  None of us are under any illusions.  We’re all aware of the many potential pitfalls, andthere are plenty of reasons for skepticism.  But history would judge us harshly if we did not doour part in at least trying to end this terrible conflict with diplomacy.   If implemented -- and that’s a significant “if” -- this cessation could reduce the violence andget more food and aid to Syrians who are suffering and desperately need it.  It could savelives.  Potentially, it could also lead to negotiations on a political settlement to end the civilwar so that everybody can focus their attention on destroying ISIL.  And that’s why the UnitedStates will do everything we can to maximize the chances of success in this cessation ofhostilities.  At the same time, I want to make totally clear that there will be absolutely nocease-fire with respect to ISIL.  We remain relentless in going after them.   About two months ago, at the Pentagon, I said that we had to squeeze ISIL’s core in Syriaand Iraq -- its heart -- to make it harder for these killers to pump their terror and theirpropaganda to the rest of the world.  And over the last two months, the good news is we’vedone exactly that.  We’ve continued to intensify our efforts, and we’re seeing results.   Today, I directed my team to continue accelerating this campaign on all fronts.  Our 66-
member coalition, including Arab partners, continues to grow stronger.  Over the past twomonths, thanks to Secretary Carter’s good work, just about all of our military partners haveagreed to increase their contributions, buying into our conception of how we ramp us thepressure on ISIL.  Dutch aircraft are now striking ISIL targets in Syria.  Saudi Arabia and theUnited Arab Emirates are expanding their role in the air campaign.  Canada is tripling itspersonnel to help train and advise forces in Iraq. Every day, our air campaign -- more than 10,000 strikes so far -- continues to destroy ISILforces, infrastructure and heavy weapons.  ISIL fighters are learning that they’ve got no safehaven.  We can hit them anywhere, anytime -- and we do.  In fact, ISIL still has not had asingle successful major offensive operation in Syria or Iraq since last summer.  And wecontinue to go after ISIL leaders and commanders -- taking them out, day in, day out, oneafter another after another.   With coalition training, equipment and support -- including our Special Forces -- local forcescontinue to push ISIL back out of territory that they had previously held.  After intense block-
by-block fighting, Iraqi forces recently succeeded in pushing ISIL out of Ramadi.  ISIL hasnow lost a series of key Iraqi towns and cities -- more than 40 percent of the areas it oncecontrolled in Iraq.  And today, we discussed the next phases of this fight, including movingagainst ISIL in the city of Hīt, and the resources needed to retake Anbar Province and Mosul. And as we approach the G7 this spring, I’ll continue to work with the international communityso Iraq gets the financial support it needs to sustain this campaign, rebuild communities thathave been devastated by ISIL presence, and pursue critical economic reforms.  
  
Meanwhile, in Syria, a coalition of local forces continues to push ISIL back, including out of thestrategic Tishrin Dam area.  Now they’re battling ISIL at al-Shaddadi.  And they’re continuingto squeeze ISIL’s stronghold of Raqqa, cutting off highways and supply lines.  Raqqa is not thecapital of a growing caliphate; it’s increasingly under stress as ISIL territory shrinks.  Thanks to our wave of strikes against its oil infrastructure, tanker trucks, wells and refineries,ISIL’s oil production and revenues are significantly reduced.  We’re destroying the storagesites where ISIL holds its cash -- its money is literally going up in smoke.  As a result, ISILhas been forced to slash the salaries of its fighters, which, increasingly, diminishes theirmorale.  We continue to hear reports of defections, and executions of those who try to defect.  At the same time, thanks to the coordination of many nations -- including Turkey’s continuingwork to tighten its border -- the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into Syria finally appears tobe slowing.  The bottom line is there are fewer ISIL fighters on the battlefield in Syria andIraq, and for those who are there, it’s harder for them to recruit and replenish their ranks. As its finances shrink, ISIL is also imposing more taxes and fines on those under its brutalrule.  That, in turn, stokes even more resentment among local populations.  More people arerealizing that ISIL is not a caliphate, it’s a crime ring.  “It’s a criminal gang pretending to be astate,” said one Syrian refugee.  “They turned out to be thieves,” said another.  ISIL, said oneSyrian, “has made an enemy of almost everyone.” So they’re not winning over hearts and minds, and they’re under severe pressure.  But aswe’ve said all along, the only way to deal with ISIL in a way that defeats them in a lasting wayis to end the chaos and the civil war that has engulfed Syria.  That’s how ISIL was able tothrive in the first place.  The cessation of hostilities that’s scheduled to take effect at midnighttomorrow is a potential step in bringing about an end to the chaos.   Even under the best of circumstances, we don’t expect the violence to end immediately.  Infact, I think we are certain that there will continue to be fighting, in part because not onlyISIL, but organizations like Al Nusra that is not part of any negotiations and is hostile to theUnited States, is going to continue to fight.   But everybody knows what needs to happen, and that is all parties that are part of thecessation of activities need to end attacks, including aerial bombardment.  Humanitarian aidmust be allowed to reach areas under siege.  And a lot of that is going to depend on whetherthe Syrian regime, Russia, and their allies live up to their commitments.  The coming days willbe critical, and the world will be watching. More broadly, this is going to be a test of whether the parties are truly committed tonegotiations.  The process agreed to in Vienna is clear -- a transition toward a more inclusiverepresentative government, a new constitution, followed by free elections.   
  
I will say it again:  Such a future, I am convinced, cannot include Bashar al-Assad.  It’s clearthat after years of his barbaric war against his own people -- including torture, and barrelbombs, and sieges, and starvation -- many Syrians will never stop fighting until Assad is outof power.  There’s no alternative to a managed transition away from Assad.  It’s the only wayto end the civil war and unite the Syrian people against terrorists.   This is an area where there’s still significant dispute between us and the Russians, between usand the Iranians, between us and some of the other players on the ground.  And the questionis going to be whether the cessation of hostilities gives all the parties concerned anopportunity to reflect and assess what, in fact, will be required in order for us to see an end tothe fighting in Syria. Beyond Syria and Iraq, I want to point out that we continue to go after ISIL wherever it triesto take root, working with partners from Nigeria to Afghanistan.  As we showed last week withour strike on an ISIL training camp in Libya, which targeted a senior ISIL operative, we willcontinue to use the full range of tools to eliminate ISIL threats wherever they are.  Meanwhile,the United States will continue to support the Libyan people as they work to form a newgovernment and regain control of their country, as we’ve seen in recent days with Libyanscelebrating in the streets as ISIL was driven from parts of Benghazi.   Even as we continue our military and counterterrorism efforts, we also recognize that it’s notenough to defeat ISIL on the battlefield.  We’re going to have to defeat its ideology, whichradicalizes, recruits, and inspires people to violence.  The United Arab Emirates, Malaysia andSaudi Arabia are stepping up their efforts to discredit ISIL propaganda.   Here at the State Department, our new Global Engagement Center will do more to lift upvoices that expose ISIL as the murderers that they are -- killers of innocent Muslim men,women and children.  And my administration is working with high-tech leaders in SiliconValley, including Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter to help counter ISIL online and to empowermore people, especially young people, to use their talents and technology to push back onISIL’s propaganda. Finally, we had an opportunity to discuss the importance of us staying vigilant here at home. Lone actors or small groups of terrorists like those in San Bernardino are very hard to detect.And they continue to pose a serious threat.  So at every level -- federal, state and local -- lawenforcement needs to be working together, 24/7, sharing information and connecting the dotsto prevent attacks. As we do, we’ll continue to partner with communities to help them stay strong and resilient. That includes upholding our values, including freedom of religion, so that we stay united asone American family. So to summarize, the fight against ISIL will remain difficult but we will continue to draw on allelements of our national power -- military, intelligence, diplomacy, homeland security, lawenforcement, and the strength of our communities.  And I am confident that we will prevail.
  
 We are in a better position now than we were last month, and a better position last monththan we were three months ago.   In the end, brutality of ISIL is no match for the yearning of millions who want to live insecurity and dignity.  I think of the Syrian who returned to his home in Kobani, a city that wasin ruins but liberated from ISIL.  “Despite knowing life would be tougher here,” he said, “Ichose to come back.”  And I think of the tens of thousands of people of Tikrit in Iraq, whohave returned home, including students back at their university, focusing on a better future.   So the road ahead will not be easy, but our coalition continues to grow stronger.  The ISILcore in Syria and Iraq continues to shrink.  With allies and partners and the service of ourdedicated personnel, our diplomats, our civilians, and our military, we will destroy thisbarbaric terrorist organization and continue to stand with people across the region who seek abetter and a safer future. Thanks very much, everybody.
