Thank you.  Thank you so much. Madam Chairwoman [Dlamini-Zuma], thank you so much foryour kind words and your leadership.  To Prime Minister Hailemariam, and the people ofEthiopia -- once again, thank you for your wonderful hospitality and for hosting this pan-
African institution.  To members of the African Union, distinguished guests, ladies andgentlemen -- thank you for welcoming me here today.  It is a great honor to be the firstPresident of the United States to address the African Union.
I’m grateful for this opportunity to speak to the representatives of more than one billionpeople of the great African continent.  We’re joined today by citizens, by leaders of civilsociety, by faith communities, and I’m especially pleased to see so many young people whoembody the energy and optimism of today’s Africa.  Hello!  Thank you for being here.
I stand before you as a proud American.  I also stand before you as the son of an African. Africa and its people helped to shape America and allowed it to become the great nation thatit is.  And Africa and its people have helped shape who I am and how I see the world.  In thevillages in Kenya where my father was born, I learned of my ancestors, and the life of mygrandfather, the dreams of my father, the bonds of family that connect us all as Africans andAmericans.
  
As parents, Michelle and I want to make sure that our two daughters know their heritage --European and African, in all of its strengths and all of its struggle.  So we’ve taken ourdaughters and stood with them on the shores of West Africa, in those doors of no return,mindful that their ancestors were both slaves and slave owners.  We’ve stood with them inthat small cell on Robben Island where Madiba showed the world that, no matter the nature ofhis physical confinement, he alone was the master of his fate.  For us, for our children, Africaand its people teach us a powerful lesson -- that we must uphold the inherent dignity of everyhuman being.
Dignity -- that basic idea that by virtue of our common humanity, no matter where we comefrom, or what we look like, we are all born equal, touched by the grace of God. Every personhas worth.  Every person matters.  Every person deserves to be treated with decency andrespect.  Throughout much of history, mankind did not see this.  Dignity was seen as a virtuereserved to those of rank and privilege, kings and elders. It took a revolution of the spirit,over many centuries, to open our eyes to the dignity of every person.  And around the world,generations have struggled to put this idea into practice in laws and in institutions. So, too, here in Africa.  This is the cradle of humanity, and ancient African kingdoms werehome to great libraries and universities.  But the evil of slavery took root not only abroad, buthere on the continent.  Colonialism skewed Africa’s economy and robbed people of theircapacity to shape their own destiny.  Eventually, liberation movements grew.  And 50 yearsago, in a great burst of self-determination, Africans rejoiced as foreign flags came down andyour national flags went up.  As South Africa’s Albert Luthuli said at the time, “the basis forpeace and brotherhood in Africa is being restored by the resurrection of national sovereigntyand independence, of equality and the dignity of man.” A half-century into this independence era, it is long past time to put aside old stereotypes ofan Africa forever mired in poverty and conflict.  The world must recognize Africa’sextraordinary progress.  Today, Africa is one of the fastest-growing regions in the world. Africa’s middle class is projected to grow to more than one billion consumers.  With hundredsof millions of mobile phones, surging access to the Internet, Africans are beginning to leapfrogold technologies into new prosperity.  Africa is on the move, a new Africa is emerging. Propelled by this progress, and in partnership with the world, Africa has achieved historicgains in health.  The rate of new HIV/AIDS infections has plummeted.  African mothers aremore likely to survive childbirth and have healthy babies.  Deaths from malaria have beenslashed, saving the lives of millions of African children.  Millions have been lifted from extremepoverty.  Africa has led the world in sending more children to school.  In other words, moreand more African men, women and children are living with dignity and with hope.
And Africa’s progress can also be seen in the institutions that bring us together today.  When Ifirst came to Sub-Saharan Africa as a President, I said that Africa doesn’t need strongmen, itneeds strong institutions.  And one of those institutions can be the African Union.  Here, youcan come together, with a shared commitment to human dignity and development.  Here,your 54 nations pursue a common vision of an “integrated, prosperous and peaceful Africa.”
  
 As Africa changes, I’ve called on the world to change its approach to Africa.  So many Africanshave told me, we don’t want just aid, we want trade that fuels progress.  We don’t wantpatrons, we want partners who help us build our own capacity to grow.  We don’t want theindignity of dependence, we want to make our own choices and determine our own future. As President, I’ve worked to transform America’s relationship with Africa -- so that we’re trulylistening to our African friends and working together, as equal partners.  And I’m proud of theprogress that we’ve made.  We’ve boosted American exports to this region, part of trade thatsupports jobs for Africans and Americans.  To sustain our momentum -- and with thebipartisan support of some of the outstanding members of Congress who are here today -- 20of them who are here today -- I recently signed the 10-year renewal of the African Growthand Opportunity Act.  And I want to thank them all.  Why don't they stand very briefly so youcan see them, because they’ve done outstanding work.
We’ve launched major initiatives to promote food security, and public health and access toelectricity, and to prepare the next generation of African leaders and entrepreneurs --
investments that will help fuel Africa’s rise for decades to come.  Last year, as theChairwoman noted, I welcomed nearly 50 African presidents and prime ministers toWashington so we could begin a new chapter of cooperation.  And by coming to the AfricanUnion today, I’m looking to build on that commitment.
I believe Africa’s rise is not just important for Africa, it's important to the entire world.  Wewill not be able to meet the challenges of our time -- from ensuring a strong global economyto facing down violent extremism, to combating climate change, to ending hunger andextreme poverty -- without the voices and contributions of one billion Africans.
Now, even with Africa’s impressive progress, we must acknowledge that many of these gainsrest on a fragile foundation.  Alongside new wealth, hundreds of millions of Africans stillendure extreme poverty.  Alongside high-tech hubs of innovation, many Africans are crowdedinto shantytowns without power or running water -- a level of poverty that’s an assault onhuman dignity.
Moreover, as the youngest and fastest-growing continent, Africa’s population in the comingdecades will double to some two billion people, and many of them will be young, under 18. Now, on the one hand, this could bring tremendous opportunities as these young Africansharness new technologies and ignite new growth and reforms.  Economists will tell you thatcountries, regions, continents grow faster with younger populations.  It's a demographic edgeand advantage -- but only if those young people are being trained.  We need only to look atthe Middle East and North Africa to see that large numbers of young people with no jobs andstifled voices can fuel instability and disorder. 
  
I suggest to you that the most urgent task facing Africa today and for decades ahead is tocreate opportunity for this next generation.  And this will be an enormous undertaking.  Africawill need to generate millions more jobs than it’s doing right now.  And time is of the essence. The choices made today will shape the trajectory of Africa, and therefore, the world fordecades to come.  And as your partner and your friend, allow me to suggest several ways thatwe can meet this challenge together.
Africa’s progress will depend on unleashing economic growth -- not just for the few at the top,but for the many, because an essential element of dignity is being able to live a decent life. That begins with a job.  And that requires trade and investment.
Many of your nations have made important reforms to attract investment -- it’s been a sparkfor growth.  But in many places across Africa, it’s still too hard to start a venture, still too hardto build a business.  Governments that take additional reforms to make doing business easierwill have an eager partner in the United States.
And that includes reforms to help Africa trade more with itself -- as the Chairwoman and Idiscussed before we came out here today -- because the biggest markets for your goods areoften right next door.  You don't have to just look overseas for growth, you can lookinternally.  And our work to help Africa modernize customs and border crossings started withthe East African Community -- now we’re expanding our efforts across the continent, becauseit shouldn’t be harder for African countries to trade with each other than it is for you to tradewith Europe and America.
Now, most U.S. trade with the region is with just three countries -- South Africa, Nigeria andAngola -- and much of that is in the form of energy.  I want Africans and Americans doingmore business together in more sectors, in more countries.  So we’re increasing trademissions to places like Tanzania, Ethiopia Mozambique.  We’re working to help more Africansget their goods to market.  Next year, we’ll host another U.S.-Africa Business Forum tomobilize billions of dollars in new trade and investment -- so we’re buying more of eachother’s products and all growing together.
Now, the United States isn’t the only country that sees your growth as an opportunity.  Andthat is a good thing.  When more countries invest responsibly in Africa, it creates more jobsand prosperity for us all.  So I want to encourage everybody to do business with Africa, andAfrican countries should want to do business with every country.  But economic relationshipscan’t simply be about building countries’ infrastructure with foreign labor or extracting Africa’snatural resources.  Real economic partnerships have to be a good deal for Africa -- they haveto create jobs and capacity for Africans.
And that includes the point that Chairwoman Zuma made about illicit flows with multinationals-- which is one of the reasons that we've been a leading advocate, working with the G7, toassist in making sure that there’s honest accounting when businesses are investing here in
  
Africa, and making sure that capital flows are properly accounted for.  That's the kind ofpartnership America offers.
Nothing will unlock Africa’s economic potential more than ending the cancer of corruption. And you are right that it is not just a problem of Africa, it is a problem of those who dobusiness with Africa.  It is not unique to Africa -- corruption exists all over the world, includingin the United States.  But here in Africa, corruption drains billions of dollars from economiesthat can't afford to lose billions of dollars -- that's money that could be used to create jobsand build hospitals and schools.  And when someone has to pay a bribe just to start abusiness or go to school, or get an official to do the job they’re supposed to be doing anyway -
- that’s not “the African way.”  It undermines the dignity of the people you represent.
Only Africans can end corruption in their countries.  As African governments commit to takingaction, the United States will work with you to combat illicit financing, and promote goodgovernance and transparency and rule of law.  And we already have strong laws in place thatsay to U.S. companies, you can't engage in bribery to try to get business -- which not allcountries have.  And we actually enforce it and police it.
And let me add that criminal networks are both fueling corruption and threatening Africa’sprecious wildlife -- and with it, the tourism that many African economies count on.  SoAmerica also stands with you in the fight against wildlife trafficking.  That's something thathas to be addressed.
But, ultimately, the most powerful antidote to the old ways of doing things is this newgeneration of African youth.  History shows that the nations that do best are the ones thatinvest in the education of their people.  You see, in this information age, jobs can flowanywhere, and they typically will flow to where workers are literate and highly skilled andonline. And Africa’s young people are ready to compete.  I've met them -- they are hungry,they are eager.  They’re willing to work hard.  So we've got to invest in them.  As Africainvests in education, our entrepreneurship programs are helping innovators start newbusinesses and create jobs right here in Africa.  And the men and women in our Young AfricanLeaders Initiative today will be the leaders who can transform business and civil society andgovernments tomorrow.
Africa’s progress will depend on development that truly lifts countries from poverty toprosperity -- because people everywhere deserve the dignity of a life free from want.  A childborn in Africa today is just as equal and just as worthy as a child born in Asia or Europe orAmerica.  At the recent development conference here in Addis, African leadership helped forgea new global compact for financing that fuels development. And under the AU’s leadership, thevoice of a united Africa will help shape the world’s next set of development goals, and you’repursuing a vision of the future that you want for Africa.
  
And America’s approach to development -- the central focus of our engagement with Africa --is focused on helping you build your own capacity to realize that vision.  Instead of justshipping food aid to Africa, we’ve helped more than two million farmers use new techniques toboost their yields, feed more people, reduce hunger.  With our new alliance of governmentand the private sector investing billions of dollars in African agriculture, I believe we canachieve our goal and lift 50 million Africans from poverty.
Instead of just sending aid to build power plants, our Power Africa initiative is mobilizingbillions of dollars in investments from governments and businesses to reduce the number ofAfricans living without electricity.  Now, an undertaking of this magnitude will not be quick.  Itwill take many years.  But working together, I believe we can bring electricity to more than 60million African homes and businesses and connect more Africans to the global economy.
Instead of just telling Africa, you’re on your own, in dealing with climate change, we’redelivering new tools and financing to more than 40 African nations to help them prepare andadapt.  By harnessing the wind and sun, your vast geothermal energy and rivers forhydropower, you can turn this climate threat into an economic opportunity.  And I urge Africato join us in rejecting old divides between North and South so we can forge a strong globalclimate agreement this year in Paris.  Because sparing some of the world’s poorest peoplefrom rising seas, more intense droughts, shortages of water and food is a matter of survivaland a matter of human dignity. Instead of just sending medicine, we’re investing in better treatments and helping Africaprevent and treat diseases.  As the United States continues to provide billions of dollars in thefight against HIV/AIDS, and as your countries take greater ownership of health programs,we’re moving toward a historic accomplishment -- the first AIDS-free generation.  And if theworld learned anything from Ebola, it’s that the best way to prevent epidemics is to buildstrong public health systems that stop diseases from spreading in the first place.  So Americais proud to partner with the AU and African countries in this mission.  Today, I can announcethat of the $1 billion that the United States is devoting to this work globally, half will supportefforts here in Africa.
I believe Africa’s progress will also depend on democracy, because Africans, like peopleeverywhere, deserve the dignity of being in control of their own lives.  We all know what theingredients of real democracy are.  They include free and fair elections, but also freedom ofspeech and the press, freedom of assembly.  These rights are universal.  They’re written intoAfrican constitutions.  The African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights declares that “everyindividual shall have the right to the respect of the dignity inherent in a human being.”  FromSierra Leone, Ghana, Benin, to Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, democracy has taken root. In Nigeria, more than 28 million voters bravely cast their ballots and power transferred as itshould -- peacefully.
  
Yet at this very moment, these same freedoms are denied to many Africans.  And I have toproclaim, democracy is not just formal elections.  When journalists are put behind bars fordoing their jobs, or activists are threatened as governments crack down on civil society --then you may have democracy in name, but not in substance.   And I'm convinced thatnations cannot realize the full promise of independence until they fully protect the rights oftheir people.
And this is true even for countries that have made important democratic progress.  As Iindicated during my visit to Kenya, the remarkable gains that country has made with a newconstitution, with its election, cannot be jeopardized by restrictions on civil society.  Likewise,our host, Ethiopians have much to be proud of -- I've been amazed at all the wonderful workthat's being done here -- and it's true that the elections that took place here occurred withoutviolence.  But as I discussed with Prime Minister Hailemariam, that’s just the start ofdemocracy.  I believe Ethiopia will not fully unleash the potential of its people if journalists arerestricted or legitimate opposition groups can't participate in the campaign process.  And, tohis credit, the Prime Minister acknowledged that more work will need to be done for Ethiopiato be a full-fledged, sustainable democracy. So these are conversations we have to have as friends. Our American democracy is notperfect.  We've worked for many years  -- but one thing we do is we continually reexamine tofigure out how can we make our democracy better.  And that's a force of strength for us,being willing to look and see honestly what we need to be doing to fulfill the promise of ourfounding documents. And every country has to go through that process.  No country is perfect, but we have to behonest, and strive to expand freedoms, to broaden democracy.  The bottom line is that whencitizens cannot exercise their rights, the world has a responsibility to speak out.  And Americawill, even if it’s sometimes uncomfortable -- even when it’s sometimes directed toward ourfriends.
And I know that there’s some countries that don't say anything -- and maybe that's easier forleaders to deal with.   But you're kind of stuck with us -- this is how we are.  We believe inthese things and we're going to keep on talking about them.
And I want to repeat, we do this not because we think our democracy is perfect, or we thinkthat every country has to follow precisely our path.  For more than two centuries since ourindependence, we’re still working on perfecting our union.  We're not immune from criticism. When we fall short of our ideals, we strive to do better.  But when we speak out for ourprinciples, at home and abroad, we stay true to our values and we help lift up the lives ofpeople beyond our borders.  And we think that's important.  And it's especially important, Ibelieve, for those of us of African descent, because we've known what it feels like to be on thereceiving end of injustice.  We know what it means to be discriminated against.  We knowwhat it means to be jailed.  So how can we stand by when it's happening to somebody else?
  
I'll be frank with you, it can't just be America that's talking about these things.  Fellow Africancountries have to talk about these things.  Just as other countries championed your breakfrom colonialism, our nations must all raise our voices when universal rights are being denied. For if we truly believe that Africans are equal in dignity, then Africans have an equal right tofreedoms that are universal -- that’s a principle we all have to defend.  And it's not just aWestern idea; it's a human idea. I have to also say that Africa’s democratic progress is also at risk when leaders refuse to stepaside when their terms end.  Now, let me be honest with you -- I do not understand this.   Iam in my second term.  It has been an extraordinary privilege for me to serve as President ofthe United States.  I cannot imagine a greater honor or a more interesting job.  I love mywork.  But under our Constitution, I cannot run again.  I can't run again.  I actually think I'm apretty good President -- I think if I ran I could win.  But I can't. So there’s a lot that I'd like to do to keep America moving, but the law is the law.  And no oneperson is above the law.  Not even the President.  And I'll be honest with you -- I’m lookingforward to life after being President.   I won't have such a big security detail all the time.   Itmeans I can go take a walk.  I can spend time with my family.  I can find other ways to serve. I can visit Africa more often.  The point is, I don't understand why people want to stay solong.  Especially when they’ve got a lot of money. When a leader tries to change the rules in the middle of the game just to stay in office, it risksinstability and strife -- as we’ve seen in Burundi.  And this is often just a first step down aperilous path.  And sometimes you’ll hear leaders say, well, I'm the only person who can holdthis nation together.   If that's true, then that leader has failed to truly build their nation.
You look at Nelson Mandela -- Madiba, like George Washington, forged a lasting legacy notonly because of what they did in office, but because they were willing to leave office andtransfer power peacefully.  And just as the African Union has condemned coups andillegitimate transfers of power, the AU’s authority and strong voice can also help the people ofAfrica ensure that their leaders abide by term limits and their constitutions.  Nobody should bePresident for life.
And your country is better off if you have new blood and new ideas.  I'm still a pretty youngman, but I know that somebody with new energy and new insights will be good for mycountry.  It will be good for yours, too, in some cases.
Africa’s progress will also depend on security and peace -- because an essential part of humandignity is being safe and free from fear.  In Angola, Mozambique, Liberia, Sierra Leone, we’veseen conflicts end and countries work to rebuild.  But from Somalia and Nigeria to Mali andTunisia, terrorists continue to target innocent civilians.  Many of these groups claim thebanner of religion, but hundreds of millions of African Muslims know that Islam means peace. And we must call groups like al Qaeda, ISIL, al-Shabaab, Boko Haram -- we must call themwhat they are -- murderers.
  
In the face of threats, Africa -- and the African Union --has shown leadership.  Because of theAU force in Somalia, al-Shabaab controls less territory and the Somali government is growingstronger.  In central Africa, the AU-led mission continues to degrade the Lord’s ResistanceArmy.  In the Lake Chad Basin, forces from several nations -- with the backing of the AU --are fighting to end Boko Haram’s senseless brutality. And today, we salute all those who serveto protect the innocent, including so many brave African peacekeepers.
Now, as Africa stands against terror and conflict, I want you to know that the United Statesstands with you.  With training and support, we’re helping African forces grow stronger. TheUnited States is supporting the AU’s efforts to strengthen peacekeeping, and we’re workingwith countries in the region to deal with emerging crises with the African Peacekeeping RapidResponse Partnership. The world must do more to help as well.  This fall at the United Nations, I will host a summitto secure new commitments to strengthen international support for peacekeeping, includinghere in Africa.  And building on commitments that originated here in the AU, we’ll work todevelop a new partnership between the U.N. and the AU that can provide reliable support forAU peace operations.  If African governments and international partners step up with strongsupport, we can transform how we work together to promote security and peace in Africa.
Our efforts to ensure our shared security must be matched by a commitment to improvegovernance.  Those things are connected. Good governance is one of the best weaponsagainst terrorism and instability.  Our fight against terrorist groups, for example, will never bewon if we fail to address legitimate grievances that terrorists may try to exploit, if we don’tbuild trust with all communities, if we don’t uphold the rule of law.  There’s a saying, and Ibelieve it is true -- if we sacrifice liberty in the name of security, we risk losing both.
This same seriousness of purpose is needed to end conflicts. In the Central African Republic,the spirit of dialogue recently shown by ordinary citizens must be matched by leaderscommitted to inclusive elections and a peaceful transition.  In Mali, the comprehensive peaceagreement must be fulfilled.  And leaders in Sudan must know their nation will never trulythrive so long as they wage war against their own people -- the world will not forget aboutDarfur.
In South Sudan, the joy of independence has descended into the despair of violence.  I wasthere at the United Nations when we held up South Sudan as the promise of a new beginning.And neither Mr. Kiir, nor Mr. Machar have shown, so far, any interest in sparing their peoplefrom this suffering, or reaching a political solution.
Yesterday, I met with leaders from this region.  We agree that, given the current situation,Mr. Kiir and Mr. Machar must reach an agreement by August 17th -- because if they do not, Ibelieve the international community must raise the costs of intransigence.  And the worldawaits the report of the AU Commission of Inquiry, because accountability for atrocities mustbe part of any lasting peace in Africa’s youngest nation.
  
And finally, Africa’s progress will depend on upholding the human rights of all people -- for ifeach of us is to be treated with dignity, each of us must be sure to also extend that samedignity to others.  As President, I make it a point to meet with many of our Young AfricanLeaders.  And one was a young man from Senegal.  He said something wonderful about beingtogether with so many of his African brothers and sisters.  He said, “Here, I have met Africa,the [Africa] I’ve always believed in.  She’s beautiful.  She’s young.  She’s full of talent andmotivation and ambition.” I agree.
Africa is the beautiful, talented daughters who are just as capable as Africa’s sons.  And as afather, I believe that my two daughters have to have the same chance to pursue their dreamsas anybody’s son -- and that same thing holds true for girls here in Africa.  Our girls have tobe treated the same.
We can’t let old traditions stand in the way. The march of history shows that we have thecapacity to broaden our moral imaginations.  We come to see that some traditions are goodfor us, they keep us grounded, but that, in our modern world, other traditions set us back. When African girls are subjected to the mutilation of their bodies, or forced into marriage atthe ages of 9 or 10 or 11 -- that sets us back.  That's not a good tradition.  It needs to end.
When more than 80 percent of new HIV cases in the hardest-hit countries are teenage girls,that’s a tragedy; that sets us back.  So America is beginning a partnership with 10 Africancountries -- Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda,Zambia and Zimbabwe -- to keep teenage girls safe and AIDS-free.  And when girls cannot goto school and grow up not knowing how to read or write -- that denies the world futurewomen engineers, future women doctors, future women business owners, future womenpresidents -- that sets us all back.  That's a bad tradition -- not providing our girls the sameeducation as our sons.
I was saying in Kenya, nobody would put out a football team and then just play half the team. You’d lose.  the same is true when it comes to getting everybody and education.  You can'tleave half the team off -- our young women.  So as part of America’s support for theeducation and the health of our daughters, my wife, Michelle, is helping to lead a globalcampaign, including a new effort in Tanzania and Malawi, with a simple message -- Let GirlsLearn -- let girls learn so they grow up healthy and they grow up strong.  And that will begood for families.  And they will raise smart, healthy children, and that will be good for everyone of your nations.
Africa is the beautiful, strong women that these girls grow up to become.  The single bestindicator of whether a nation will succeed is how it treats its women.  When women havehealth care and women have education, families are stronger, communities are moreprosperous, children do better in school, nations are more prosperous.  Look at the amazingAfrican women here in this hall.  If you want your country to grow and succeed, you have toempower your women.  And if you want to empower more women, America will be yourpartner.   
  
Let’s work together to stop sexual assault and domestic violence.  Let’s make clear that wewill not tolerate rape as a weapon of war -- it’s a crime.  And those who commit it must bepunished.  Let’s lift up the next generation of women leaders who can help fight injustice andforge peace and start new businesses and create jobs -- and some might hire some men, too. We’ll all be better off when women have equal futures. And Africa is the beautiful tapestry of your cultures and ethnicities and races and religions. Last night, we saw this amazing dance troupe made up of street children who had formed adance troupe and they performed for the Prime Minister and myself.  And there were 80different languages and I don't know how many ethnic groups.  And there were like 30different dances that were being done.  And the Prime Minister was trying to keep up with --okay, I think that one is -- and they were moving fast.  And that diversity here in Ethiopia isrepresentative of diversity all throughout Africa.  And that's a strength.
Now, yesterday, I had the privilege to view Lucy -- you may know Lucy -- she’s our ancestor,more than 3 million years old.  In this tree of humanity, with all of our branches and diversity,we all go back to the same root.  We’re all one family -- we're all one tribe.  And yet so muchof the suffering in our world stems from our failure to remember that -- to not recognizeourselves in each other.
We think because somebody’s skin is slightly different, or their hair is slightly different, ortheir religious faith is differently expressed, or they speak a different language that it justifiessomehow us treating them with less dignity.  And that becomes the source of so many of ourproblems.  And we think somehow that we make ourselves better by putting other peopledown.  And that becomes the source of so many of our problems.  When we begin to seeother as somehow less than ourselves -- when we succumb to these artificial divisions of faithor sect or tribe or ethnicity -- then even the most awful abuses are justified in the minds ofthose who are thinking in those ways.  And in the end, abusers lose their own humanity, aswell.
Nelson Mandela taught us, “to be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in away that respects and enhances the freedom of others.”
Every one of us is equal.  Every one of us has worth.  Every one of us matters.  And when werespect the freedom of others -- no matter the color of their skin, or how they pray or whothey are or who they love -- we are all more free.  Your dignity depends on my dignity, andmy dignity depends on yours.  Imagine if everyone had that spirit in their hearts. Imagine ifgovernments operated that way.  Just imagine what the world could look like -- the futurethat we could bequeath these young people.
Yes, in our world, old thinking can be a stubborn thing.  That's one of the reasons why weneed term limits -- old people think old ways.  And you can see my grey hair, I'm getting old. 
  
The old ways can be stubborn.  But I believe the human heart is stronger.  I believe heartscan change.  I believe minds can open.  That’s how change happens.  That’s how societiesmove forward.  It's not always a straight line -- step by halting step -- sometimes you goforward, you move back a little bit.   But I believe we are marching, we are pointing towardsideals of justice and equality.
That’s how your nations won independence -- not just with rifles, but with principles andideals.  That's how African Americans won our civil rights.  That's how South Africans -- blackand white -- tore down apartheid.  That's why I can stand before you today as the first AfricanAmerican President of the United States.
New thinking.  Unleashing growth that creates opportunity.  Promoting development that liftsall people out of poverty.  Supporting democracy that gives citizens their say.  Advancing thesecurity and justice that delivers peace.  Respecting the human rights of all people.  These arethe keys to progress -- not just in Africa, but around the world.  And this is the work that wecan do together.
And I am hopeful.  As I prepare to return home, my thoughts are with that same young manfrom Senegal, who said:  Here, I have met Africa, the [Africa] I’ve always believed in.  She’sbeautiful and young, full of talent and motivation and ambition. To which I would simply add,as you build the Africa you believe in, you will have no better partner, no better friend thanthe United States of America.
God bless Africa.  God bless the United States of America.
Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you.
