All right everybody, please have a seat. 
My fellow Americans, Mahalo! It is wonderful to be here at the White House Correspondents’Dinner. What a week. As some of you heard, the state of Hawaii released my official long-formbirth certificate.
Hopefully this puts all doubts to rest. But just in case there are any lingering questions,tonight I’m prepared to go a step further. Tonight, for the first time, I am releasing my officialbirth video.
Now, I warn you -- no one has seen this footage in 50 years, not even me. But let’s take alook.
 [Video rolls]
Oh, well. Back to square one. I want to make clear to the Fox News table: That was ajoke. That was not my real birth video. That was a children’s cartoon. Call Disney if you don'tbelieve me. They have the original long-form version.
  
Anyway, it’s good to be back with so many esteemed guests.Celebrities. Senators. Journalists. Essential government employees. Non-essential governmentemployees. You know who you are.
I am very much looking forward to hearing Seth Meyers tonight. He’s a young, fresh face whocan do no wrong in the eyes of his fans. Seth, enjoy it while it lasts.
Yes, I think it is fair to say that when it comes to my presidency, the honeymoon is over. Forexample, some people now suggest that I’m too professorial. And I’d like to address thathead-on, by assigning all of you some reading that will help you draw your ownconclusions. Others say that I'm arrogant. But I've found a really great self-help tool forthis: my poll numbers.
I’ve even let down my key core constituency: movie stars. Just the other day, Matt Damon --I love Matt Damon, love the guy -- Matt Damon said he was disappointed in myperformance. Well, Matt, I just saw “The Adjustment Bureau,” so -- right back atcha, buddy.
Of course, there’s someone who I can always count on for support: my wonderful wifeMichelle. We made a terrific team at the Easter Egg Roll this week. I’d give out bags of candyto the kids, and she’d snatch them right back out of their little hands. Snatched them.
And where is the National Public Radio table? You guys are still here? That's good. I couldn’tremember where we landed on that. Now, I know you were a little tense when the GOP triedto cut your funding, but personally I was looking forward to new programming like “No ThingsConsidered” -- or “Wait, Wait…Don't Fund Me.”
Of course, the deficit is a serious issue. That's why Paul Ryan couldn’t be here tonight. Hisbudget has no room for laughter.
Michele Bachmann is here, though, I understand, and she is thinking about running forPresident, which is weird because I hear she was born in Canada. Yes, Michele, this is how itstarts. Just letting you know.
Tim Pawlenty? He seems all American. But have you heard his real middle name?  Tim “Hosni”Pawlenty? What a shame.
My buddy, our outstanding ambassador, Jon Huntsman, is with us. Now, there’s somethingyou might not know about Jon. He didn’t learn to speak Chinese to go there. Oh, no. Helearned English to come here.
And then there’s a vicious rumor floating around that I think could really hurt Mitt Romney. Iheard he passed universal health care when he was governor of Massachusetts. Someoneshould get to the bottom of that.  
  
And I know just the guy to do it -- Donald Trump is here tonight! Now, I know that he’s takensome flak lately, but no one is happier, no one is prouder to put this birth certificate matter torest than the Donald.  And that’s because he can finally get back to focusing on the issuesthat matter –- like, did we fake the moon landing?  What really happened in Roswell? Andwhere are Biggie and Tupac?
But all kidding aside, obviously, we all know about your credentials and breadth ofexperience. For example -- no, seriously, just recently, in an episode of Celebrity Apprentice -
- at the steakhouse, the men’s cooking team cooking did not impress the judges from OmahaSteaks. And there was a lot of blame to go around. But you, Mr. Trump, recognized that thereal problem was a lack of leadership. And so ultimately, you didn’t blame Lil’ Jon orMeatloaf. You fired Gary Busey. And these are the kind of decisions that would keep me up atnight. Well handled, sir. Well handled. 
Say what you will about Mr. Trump, he certainly would bring some change to the WhiteHouse. Let’s see what we’ve got up there.
So, yes, this has been quite a year in politics, but also in the movies. Many people, forinstance, were inspired by the King’s Speech. It’s a wonderful film. Well, some of you may notknow this, but there's now a sequel in the works that touches close to home. And because thisis a Hollywood crowd, tonight I can offer a sneak peek. So can we show the trailer, please?
[Video rolls]
Coming to a theater near you.
Let me close on a serious note. We are having a good time, but as has been true for the lastseveral years, we have incredible young men and women who are serving in uniform overseasin the most extraordinary of circumstances. And we are reminded of their courage and theirvalor.
  
We also need to remember our neighbors in Alabama and across the South that have beendevastated by terrible storms from last week. Michelle and I were down there yesterday, andwe’ve spent a lot of time with some of the folks who have been affected. The devastation isunimaginable and is heartbreaking and it’s going to be a long road back. And so we need tokeep those Americans in our thoughts and in our prayers. But we also need to stand withthem in the hard months and perhaps years to come.
I intend to make sure that the federal government does that. And I’ve got faith that thejournalists in this room will do their part for the people who have been affected by thisdisaster -- by reporting on their progress, and letting the rest of America know when they willneed more help. Those are stories that need telling. And that’s what all of you do best,whether it’s rushing to the site of a devastating storm in Alabama, or braving danger to covera revolution in the Middle East.
You know, in the last months, we’ve seen journalists threatened, arrested, beaten, attacked,and in some cases even killed simply for doing their best to bring us the story, to give peoplea voice, and to hold leaders accountable. And through it all, we’ve seen daring men andwomen risk their lives for the simple idea that no one should be silenced, and everyonedeserves to know the truth.
That’s what you do. At your best that's what journalism is. That’s the principle that youuphold. It is always important, but it’s especially important in times of challenge, like themoment that America and the world is facing now.
So I thank you for your service and the contributions that you make. And I want to close byrecognizing not only your service, but also to remember those that have been lost as aconsequence of the extraordinary reporting that they’ve done over recent weeks. They help,too, to defend our freedoms and allow democracy to flourish.
God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.
