Good afternoon, everybody.  I know it’s a little warm out here so want to get started.  I’vejust had a meeting with these governors, members of Congress, local officials, as well asAdmiral Thad Allen, the National Incident Commander in charge of response efforts to the BPoil spill.  Admiral Allen gave us an update, the latest information on both the efforts to plugthe well, as well as giving us an update on arrangements and coordination that's being madewith respect to mitigating this damage that's been done. 
He updated us on these latest efforts to stop the leak, mitigate the damage to the greatbeaches of the Gulf coast, and I had the chance to visit with -- Charlotte -- a beach like PortFourchon that gives you a sense of what extraordinary efforts are being made at the locallevel, but also the damage that we're already starting to see as a consequence of this spill.
Now, our mission remains the same as it has since this disaster began, since the day I visitedLouisiana nearly four weeks ago:  We want to stop the leak; we want to contain and clean upthe oil; and we want to help the people of this region return to their lives and their livelihoodsas soon as possible. 
  
And our response treats this event for what it is:  It’s an assault on our shores, on our people,on the regional economy, and on communities like this one.  This isn’t just a mess that we’vegot to mop up.  People are watching their livelihoods wash up on the beach.  Parents areworried about the implications for their children’s health.  Every resident of this communityhas watched this nightmare threaten the dreams that they’ve worked so hard to build.  Andthey want it made right, and they want to make it right now.
I just had a chance to listen to Mayor David Carmadelle of Grande Isle, our host here, tellingus heartbreaking stories about fishermen who are trying to figure out where the nextpaycheck is going to come from, how are they going to pay a mortgage or a note on theirboat.  And he is having to dig into his pocket at this point to make sure that some of them areable to deal with the economic impact.  So this is something that has to be dealt withimmediately, not sometime later.  And that’s everybody’s driving focus -- everybody who isstanding behind me. This is our highest priority and it deserves a response that is equal to thetask.
That’s why this has already been the largest cleanup effort in U.S. history.  On the day thisdisaster began, even as we launched a search and rescue effort for workers on the drilling rig,we were already staging equipment in the event of a larger-scale spill.  By the time wediscovered the third breach, a week after the Deepwater Horizon platform sank, we hadalready stationed more than 70 vessels and hundreds of thousands of feet of protective boomon site.
Today, there are more than 20,000 people in the region working around the clock to containand clean up this spill.  We’ve activated about 1,400 members of the National Guard acrossfour states.  Nearly 1,400 vessels are aiding in the containment and cleanup effort.  And wedeployed more than 3 million feet of hard and sorbent boom, including an additional 100,000just yesterday for these parishes in Louisiana that face the greatest threat. 
Now, I’ve made clear to Admiral Allen and I did so again today that he should get whatever heneeds to deal with this crisis.  Whatever he needs, he will get.
Right now, we’re still within the window where we don’t yet know the outcome of the highlycomplex top kill procedure that the federal government authorized BP to use to try to stop theleak.  If it is successful, it would obviously be welcome news.  If it’s not, a team of some ofthe world’s top scientists, engineers and experts, led by our Energy Secretary and NobelPrize-winning physicist Steven Chu, has for some time being -- has for some time beenexploring any and all reasonable contingency plans.
But our response will continue with its full force regardless of the outcome of the top killapproach -- because even if the leak was stopped today it wouldn’t change the fact that thesewaters still contain oil from what is now the largest spill in American history.  And more of itwill come ashore.
  
To ensure that we’re fully prepared for that, and in accordance with input from folks downhere, I’ve directed Secretary Napolitano and Admiral Allen to triple the manpower in placeswhere oil has hit the shore or is within 24 hours of impact.  This increase will allow us tofurther intensify this already historic response, contain and remove oil more quickly, and helpminimize the time that any oil comes into contact with our coastline.  That means deployingmore boom, cleaning more beaches, performing more monitoring of wildlife and impact to thisecosystem.
We’re also going to continue to do whatever it takes to help Americans whose livelihoods havebeen upended by this spill.  Gulf Coast residents should know that we’ve gathered allpertinent information regarding available assistance and the federal response in one place atwhitehouse.gov.
We have ordered BP to pay economic injury claims, and we will make sure they deliver.  Andthe parish presidents and governors here in Louisiana were already giving us some sense ofsome of the bureaucratic problems that we’re going to have to cut through, but we are goingto cut through them.  And for those who are in economic distress, if you’ve already filed aclaim and you’re not satisfied with the resolution, then whitehouse.gov will point you in theright direction. 
As I said yesterday, the Small Business Administration has stepped in to help businesses byapproving loans, but also as important, allowing many to defer existing loan payments.  A lotof folks are still loaded up with loans that they had from Katrina and other natural disastersdown here, so they may need some additional help.
If you’re a small business owner and you weren’t aware of some of the programs that havebeen put in place or haven’t participated, then, again, the White House website will connectyou to the resources you need.  And we are making sure that all the parish presidents know,and folks like the mayor, other local officials are going to be aware of how they can getimmediate help from us.
What’s more, we’ve stationed doctors and scientists across the five Gulf States to look out forpeople’s health and then to monitor any ill effects felt by cleanup workers and local residents. And we’ve begun setting up a system to track these efforts -- excuse me, to track theseeffects -- and ensure folks get the care that they need.  And we’ve told BP that we expectthem to pay for that, too.
As I’ve said before, BP is the responsible party for this disaster.  What that means is they’relegally responsible for stopping the leak and they’re financially responsible for the enormousdamage that they’ve created.  And we’re going to hold them accountable, along with anyother party responsible for the initial explosion and loss of life on that platform.
  
But as I said yesterday, and as I repeated in the meeting that we just left, I ultimately takeresponsibility for solving this crisis.  I’m the President and the buck stops with me.  So I givethe people of this community and the entire Gulf my word that we’re going to hold ourselvesaccountable to do whatever it takes for as long as it takes to stop this catastrophe, to defendour natural resources, to repair the damage, and to keep this region on its feet.  Justice willbe done for those whose lives have been upended by this disaster, for the families of thosewhose lives have been lost -- that is a solemn pledge that I am making.
I think I can speak for anybody here, and for anybody who has been involved in the responseand the cleanup effort, and for most Americans, when I say that I would gladly do whatever ittakes to end this disaster today.  But I want to also repeat something that I said to the groupas a whole while we were meeting.  This is a manmade catastrophe that’s still evolving andwe face a long-term recovery and restoration effort. 
America has never experienced an event like this before.  And that means that as we respondto it, not every judgment we make is going to be right the first time out.  Sometimes, thereare going to be disagreements between experts, or between federal and state and localofficials, or among state officials, or between states, about what the most effective measureswill be.
Sometimes, there are going to be risks and unintended consequences associated with aparticular mitigation strategy that we consider.  In other words, there are going to be a lot ofjudgment calls involved here.  There are not going to be silver bullets or a lot of perfectanswers for some of the challenges that we face.
Understandably, the feelings of frustration and anger, the sense that any response isinadequate -- we expect that frustration and anger to continue until we actually solve thisproblem.  But in the meantime, we’ve got to make sure that everybody is working in concert,that everybody is moving in the same direction.  And I want everybody to know thateverybody here -- at every level -- is working night and day to end this crisis. We’reconsidering every single idea out there, especially from folks who know these communitiesbest.
Admiral Allen announced yesterday, for example, that, after a bunch of back-and-forthbetween state and federal experts, he is prepared to authorize moving forward with a portionof the idea for a barrier island that may stop some of the oil from coming ashore.  We had anextensive conversation about this and -- to see whether additional steps can be taken on thisbarrier island idea. 
And what I told the parish president, what I told the Governor, is that if there is an idea thatcan be shown to work, then we should move forward on it, and they deserve quick answers. But I also reminded everybody that we’ve got to make sure that whatever we do is actuallygoing to work, particularly because we’re going to have not unlimited resources, at least notright now.  For example, there’s a limited amount of boom.
  
We’re going to try to get more boom manufactured.  But that may take some time, and thatmeans we’re going to have to make some decisions about how to deploy it effectively.
The bottom line is this:  Every decision we make is based on a single criterion -- what’s goingto best protect and make whole the people and the ecosystems of the Gulf.
And I want to thank everybody in this region who’s rolled up their sleeves and pitched in tohelp -- from the National Guard putting their experience to the task, to the local officials andevery citizen who loves this area and calls it home, every American who’s traveled to theregion to lend a hand.  If any American is looking for ways to volunteer and help, then we’veput links to that information on our website, as well -- that's whitehouse.gov. 
And, all these governors -- Bobby Jindal, as well as Charlie Crist and Bob Riley, they want --and I know Haley Barbour is not here but I think he agrees with this, as well -- one of thepowerful ways that you can help the Gulf right now is to visit the communities and thebeaches off of the coast.  Except for three beaches here in Louisiana, all of the Gulf’s beachesat this moment are open, they are safe and they are clean.  And so that's always a good wayto help, is to come down and provide support to the communities along the coasts.
To the people of the Gulf Coast:  I know that you’ve weathered your fair share of trials andtragedy.  I know there have been times where you’ve wondered if you were being asked toface them alone.  I am here to tell you that you’re not alone.  You will not be abandoned.  Youwill not be left behind.  The cameras at some point may leave; the media may get tired of thestory; but we will not.  We are on your side and we will see this through.  We’re going to keepat this every day until the leak has stopped, until this coastline is clean, and your communitiesare made whole again.  That’s my promise to you.  And that is a promise on behalf of anation.  It is one that we will keep. 
And I will make one last point -- and I said this to every leader who is here:  If something isnot going right down here, then they need to talk to Thad Allen.  And if they’re not gettingsatisfaction from Thad Allen, then they can talk to me.  There’s nobody here who can’t get intouch with me directly if there is an idea, a suggestion, or a logjam that needs to be dealtwith.
So we’re in this together.  And it’s going to be a difficult time, and obviously the folks downhere are going to be feeling the brunt of it, but we’re going to make sure that we’re doingeverything we can to get this solved as quickly as possible.
And I want to again think everybody here for the extraordinary work that they’re putting in. You shouldn’t underestimate how hard these folks are working, day in, day out, on behalf oftheir constituencies.
So thank you very much.  Thank you, everybody.
