Mark, I want to thank you for your introduction. I still remember the first time we met, thetime we spent together, and the conversation we had about Daniel. And that changed me thatday. And my hope, earnestly, has been that it would change the country. 
Five years ago this week, a sitting member of Congress and 18 others were shot at, at asupermarket in Tucson, Arizona. It wasn’t the first time I had to talk to the nation in responseto a mass shooting, nor would it be the last. Fort Hood. Binghamton. Aurora. Oak Creek.Newtown. The Navy Yard. Santa Barbara. Charleston. San Bernardino. Too many.
Audience Member: Too many.
Audience Member: Too many.
Audience Member: Too many.
  
President Obama: Thanks to a great medical team and the love of her husband, Mark, mydear friend and colleague, Gabby Giffords, survived. She’s here with us today, with herwonderful mom.  Thanks to a great medical team, her wonderful husband, Mark -- who, bythe way, the last time I met with Mark -- this is just a small aside -- you may know Mark’stwin brother is in outer space.
He came to the office, and I said, how often are you talking to him? And he says, well, Iusually talk to him every day, but the call was coming in right before the meeting so I think Imay have not answered his call -- which made me feel kind of bad.  That’s a long-distancecall.  So I told him if his brother, Scott, is calling today, that he should take it.  Turn the ringeron.  
I was there with Gabby when she was still in the hospital, and we didn’t think necessarily atthat point that she was going to survive. And that visit right before a memorial -- about anhour later Gabby first opened her eyes. And I remember talking to mom about that. But Iknow the pain that she and her family have endured these past five years, and therehabilitation and the work and the effort to recover from shattering injuries.
And then I think of all the Americans who aren’t as fortunate. Every single year, more than30,000 Americans have their lives cut short by guns -- 30,000. Suicides. Domestic violence.Gang shootouts. Accidents. Hundreds of thousands of Americans have lost brothers andsisters, or buried their own children. Many have had to learn to live with a disability, orlearned to live without the love of their life. 
A number of those people are here today. They can tell you some stories. In this room righthere, there are a lot of stories. There’s a lot of heartache. There’s a lot of resilience, there’s alot of strength, but there’s also a lot of pain. And this is just a small sample.
The United States of America is not the only country on Earth with violent or dangerouspeople. We are not inherently more prone to violence. But we are the only advanced countryon Earth that sees this kind of mass violence erupt with this kind of frequency. It doesn’thappen in other advanced countries. It’s not even close. And as I’ve said before, somehowwe’ve become numb to it and we start thinking that this is normal.
And instead of thinking about how to solve the problem, this has become one of our mostpolarized, partisan debates -- despite the fact that there’s a general consensus in Americaabout what needs to be done. That’s part of the reason why, on Thursday, I’m going to hold atown hall meeting in Virginia on gun violence. Because my goal here is to bring good peopleon both sides of this issue together for an open discussion. 
\I’m not on the ballot again. I’m not looking to score some points. I think we can disagreewithout impugning other people’s motives or without being disagreeable. We don’t need to betalking past one another.
  
But we do have to feel a sense of urgency about it. In Dr. King’s words, we need to feel the“fierce urgency of now.” Because people are dying. And the constant excuses for inaction nolonger do, no longer suffice. 
That’s why we’re here today. Not to debate the last mass shooting, but to do something to tryto prevent the next one.  To prove that the vast majority of Americans, even if our voicesaren’t always the loudest or most extreme, care enough about a little boy like Daniel to cometogether and take common-sense steps to save lives and protect more of our children.
Now, I want to be absolutely clear at the start -- and I’ve said this over and over again, thisalso becomes routine, there is a ritual about this whole thing that I have to do -- I believe inthe Second Amendment. It’s there written on the paper. It guarantees a right to bear arms.No matter how many times people try to twist my words around -- I taught constitutional law,I know a little about this -- I get it. But I also believe that we can find ways to reduce gunviolence consistent with the Second Amendment. 
I mean, think about it. We all believe in the First Amendment, the guarantee of free speech,but we accept that you can’t yell “fire” in a theater. We understand there are some constraintson our freedom in order to protect innocent people. We cherish our right to privacy, but weaccept that you have to go through metal detectors before being allowed to board a plane. It’snot because people like doing that, but we understand that that’s part of the price of living ina civilized society. 
And what’s often ignored in this debate is that a majority of gun owners actually agree. Amajority of gun owners agree that we can respect the Second Amendment while keeping anirresponsible, law-breaking feud from inflicting harm on a massive scale. 
Today, background checks are required at gun stores. If a father wants to teach his daughterhow to hunt, he can walk into a gun store, get a background check, purchase his weaponsafely and responsibly. This is not seen as an infringement on the Second Amendment.Contrary to the claims of what some gun rights proponents have suggested, this hasn’t beenthe first step in some slippery slope to mass confiscation. Contrary to claims of somepresidential candidates, apparently, before this meeting, this is not a plot to take awayeverybody’s guns. You pass a background check; you purchase a firearm. 
The problem is some gun sellers have been operating under a different set of rules. A violentfelon can buy the exact same weapon over the Internet with no background check, noquestions asked. A recent study found that about one in 30 people looking to buy guns on onewebsite had criminal records -- one out of 30 had a criminal record. We’re talking aboutindividuals convicted of serious crimes -- aggravated assault, domestic violence, robbery,illegal gun possession. People with lengthy criminal histories buying deadly weapons all tooeasily. And this was just one website within the span of a few months. 
  
So we’ve created a system in which dangerous people are allowed to play by a different set ofrules than a responsible gun owner who buys his or her gun the right way and subjectsthemselves to a background check. That doesn’t make sense. Everybody should have to abideby the same rules. Most Americans and gun owners agree. And that’s what we tried to changethree years ago, after 26 Americans -– including 20 children -– were murdered at Sandy HookElementary.
Two United States Senators -– Joe Manchin, a Democrat from West Virginia, and Pat Toomey,a Republican from Pennsylvania, both gun owners, both strong defenders of our SecondAmendment rights, both with “A” grades from the NRA –- that’s hard to get -- workedtogether in good faith, consulting with folks like our Vice President, who has been a championon this for a long time, to write a common-sense compromise bill that would have requiredvirtually everyone who buys a gun to get a background check. That was it. Pretty common-
sense stuff. Ninety percent of Americans supported that idea. Ninety percent of Democrats inthe Senate voted for that idea. But it failed because 90 percent of Republicans in the Senatevoted against that idea. 
How did this become such a partisan issue? Republican President George W. Bush once said,“I believe in background checks at gun shows or anywhere to make sure that guns don’t getinto the hands of people that shouldn’t have them.” Senator John McCain introduced abipartisan measure to address the gun show loophole, saying, “We need this amendmentbecause criminals and terrorists have exploited and are exploiting this very obvious loopholein our gun safety laws.” Even the NRA used to support expanded background checks. And bythe way, most of its members still do. Most Republican voters still do. 
How did we get here? How did we get to the place where people think requiring acomprehensive background check means taking away people’s guns?
Each time this comes up, we are fed the excuse that common-sense reforms like backgroundchecks might not have stopped the last massacre, or the one before that, or the one beforethat, so why bother trying. I reject that thinking.  We know we can’t stop every act ofviolence, every act of evil in the world. But maybe we could try to stop one act of evil, one actof violence. 
Some of you may recall, at the same time that Sandy Hook happened, a disturbed person inChina took a knife and tried to kill -- with a knife -- a bunch of children in China. But most ofthem survived because he didn’t have access to a powerful weapon. We maybe can’t saveeverybody, but we could save some. Just as we don’t prevent all traffic accidents but we takesteps to try to reduce traffic accidents. 
As Ronald Reagan once said, if mandatory background checks could save more lives, “it wouldbe well worth making it the law of the land.” The bill before Congress three years ago metthat test. Unfortunately, too many senators failed theirs.  
  
In fact, we know that background checks make a difference. After Connecticut passed a lawrequiring background checks and gun safety courses, gun deaths decreased by 40 percent --40 percent.  Meanwhile, since Missouri repealed a law requiring comprehensive backgroundchecks and purchase permits, gun deaths have increased to almost 50 percent higher than thenational average. One study found, unsurprisingly, that criminals in Missouri now have easieraccess to guns. 
And the evidence tells us that in states that require background checks, law-abidingAmericans don’t find it any harder to purchase guns whatsoever. Their guns have not beenconfiscated. Their rights have not been infringed. 
And that’s just the information we have access to. With more research, we could furtherimprove gun safety. Just as with more research, we’ve reduced traffic fatalities enormouslyover the last 30 years. We do research when cars, food, medicine, even toys harm people sothat we make them safer. And you know what -- research, science -- those are good things.They work.  They do. 
But think about this. When it comes to an inherently deadly weapon -- nobody argues thatguns are potentially deadly -- weapons that kill tens of thousands of Americans every year,Congress actually voted to make it harder for public health experts to conduct research intogun violence; made it harder to collect data and facts and develop strategies to reduce gunviolence. Even after San Bernardino, they’ve refused to make it harder for terror suspects whocan’t get on a plane to buy semi-automatic weapons. That’s not right. That can’t be right. 
So the gun lobby may be holding Congress hostage right now, but they cannot hold Americahostage.  We do not have to accept this carnage as the price of freedom. 
Now, I want to be clear. Congress still needs to act. The folks in this room will not rest untilCongress does.  Because once Congress gets on board with common-sense gun safetymeasures we can reduce gun violence a whole lot more. But we also can’t wait. Until we havea Congress that’s in line with the majority of Americans, there are actions within my legalauthority that we can take to help reduce gun violence and save more lives -– actions thatprotect our rights and our kids.
After Sandy Hook, Joe and I worked together with our teams and we put forward a wholeseries of executive actions to try to tighten up the existing rules and systems that we had inplace. But today, we want to take it a step further. So let me outline what we’re going to bedoing. 
Number one, anybody in the business of selling firearms must get a license and conductbackground checks, or be subject to criminal prosecutions.  It doesn’t matter whether you’redoing it over the Internet or at a gun show. It’s not where you do it, but what you do. 
  
We’re also expanding background checks to cover violent criminals who try to buy some of themost dangerous firearms by hiding behind trusts and corporations and various cutouts.
We’re also taking steps to make the background check system more efficient. Under theguidance of Jim Comey and the FBI, our Deputy Director Tom Brandon at ATF, we’re going tohire more folks to process applications faster, and we’re going to bring an outdatedbackground check system into the 21st century.  
And these steps will actually lead to a smoother process for law-abiding gun owners, asmoother process for responsible gun dealers, a stronger process for protecting the peoplefrom -- the public from dangerous people. So that’s number one.
Number two, we’re going to do everything we can to ensure the smart and effectiveenforcement of gun safety laws that are already on the books, which means we’re going toadd 200 more ATF agents and investigators. We’re going to require firearms dealers to reportmore lost or stolen guns on a timely basis. We’re working with advocates to protect victims ofdomestic abuse from gun violence, where too often -- where too often, people are not gettingthe protection that they need. 
Number three, we’re going to do more to help those suffering from mental illness get the helpthat they need.  High-profile mass shootings tend to shine a light on those few mentallyunstable people who inflict harm on others. But the truth is, is that nearly two in three gundeaths are from suicides. So a lot of our work is to prevent people from hurting themselves. 
That’s why we made sure that the Affordable Care Act -- also known as Obamacare -- that lawmade sure that treatment for mental health was covered the same as treatment for any otherillness. And that’s why we’re going to invest $500 million to expand access to treatmentacross the country.  
It’s also why we’re going to ensure that federal mental health records are submitted to thebackground check system, and remove barriers that prevent states from reporting relevantinformation. If we can continue to de-stigmatize mental health issues, get folks proper care,and fill gaps in the background check system, then we can spare more families the pain oflosing a loved one to suicide. 
And for those in Congress who so often rush to blame mental illness for mass shootings as away of avoiding action on guns, here’s your chance to support these efforts. Put your moneywhere your mouth is.  
Number four, we’re going to boost gun safety technology. Today, many gun injuries anddeaths are the result of legal guns that were stolen or misused or discharged accidentally. In2013 alone, more than 500 people lost their lives to gun accidents –- and that includes 30children younger than five years old. In the greatest, most technologically advanced nation onEarth, there is no reason for this. We need to develop new technologies that make guns safer.
  
If we can set it up so you can’t unlock your phone unless you’ve got the right fingerprint, whycan’t we do the same thing for our guns?  If there’s an app that can help us find a missingtablet -- which happens to me often the older I get -- if we can do it for your iPad, there’s noreason we can’t do it with a stolen gun. If a child can’t open a bottle of aspirin, we shouldmake sure that they can’t pull a trigger on a gun.  Right? 
So we’re going to advance research. We’re going to work with the private sector to updatefirearms technology. 
And some gun retailers are already stepping up by refusing to finalize a purchase without acomplete background check, or by refraining from selling semi-automatic weapons or high-
capacity magazines. And I hope that more retailers and more manufacturers join them --because they should care as much as anybody about a product that now kills almost as manyAmericans as car accidents.
I make this point because none of us can do this alone. I think Mark made that point earlier.All of us should be able to work together to find a balance that declares the rest of our rightsare also important -- Second Amendment rights are important, but there are other rights thatwe care about as well. And we have to be able to balance them. Because our right to worshipfreely and safely –- that right was denied to Christians in Charleston, South Carolina.  Andthat was denied Jews in Kansas City. And that was denied Muslims in Chapel Hill, and Sikhs inOak Creek.  They had rights, too.  
Our right to peaceful assembly -– that right was robbed from moviegoers in Aurora andLafayette. Our unalienable right to life, and liberty, and the pursuit of happiness -– thoserights were stripped from college students in Blacksburg and Santa Barbara, and from highschoolers at Columbine, and from first-graders in Newtown. First-graders. And from everyfamily who never imagined that their loved one would be taken from our lives by a bullet froma gun. 
Every time I think about those kids it gets me mad. And by the way, it happens on the streetsof Chicago every day.  
So all of us need to demand a Congress brave enough to stand up to the gun lobby’s lies. Allof us need to stand up and protect its citizens. All of us need to demand governors andlegislatures and businesses do their part to make our communities safer. We need the widemajority of responsible gun owners who grieve with us every time this happens and feel likeyour views are not being properly represented to join with us to demand something better.  
And we need voters who want safer gun laws, and who are disappointed in leaders who standin their way, to remember come election time.  
  
I mean, some of this is just simple math. Yes, the gun lobby is loud and it is organized indefense of making it effortless for guns to be available for anybody, any time. Well, you knowwhat, the rest of us, we all have to be just as passionate. We have to be just as organized indefense of our kids. This is not that complicated. The reason Congress blocks laws is becausethey want to win elections. And if you make it hard for them to win an election if they blockthose laws, they’ll change course, I promise you. 
And, yes, it will be hard, and it won’t happen overnight. It won’t happen during this Congress.It won’t happen during my presidency.
But a lot of things don’t happen overnight. A woman’s right to vote didn’t happen overnight.The liberation of African Americans didn’t happen overnight. LGBT rights -- that was decades’worth of work. So just because it’s hard, that’s no excuse not to try. 
And if you have any doubt as to why you should feel that “fierce urgency of now,” think aboutwhat happened three weeks ago. Zaevion Dobson was a sophomore at Fulton High School inKnoxville, Tennessee. He played football; beloved by his classmates and his teachers. His ownmayor called him one of their city’s success stories. The week before Christmas, he headed toa friend’s house to play video games. He wasn’t in the wrong place at the wrong time. Hehadn’t made a bad decision. He was exactly where any other kid would be. Your kid. My kids.And then gunmen started firing. And Zaevion -- who was in high school, hadn’t even gottenstarted in life -- dove on top of three girls to shield them from the bullets. And he was shot inthe head. And the girls were spared. He gave his life to save theirs –- an act of heroism a lotbigger than anything we should ever expect from a 15-year-old. “Greater love hath no manthan this that a man lay down his life for his friends.” 
We are not asked to do what Zaevion Dobson did. We’re not asked to have shoulders that big;a heart that strong; reactions that quick. I’m not asking people to have that same level ofcourage, or sacrifice, or love. But if we love our kids and care about their prospects, and if welove this country and care about its future, then we can find the courage to vote. We can findthe courage to get mobilized and organized. We can find the courage to cut through all thenoise and do what a sensible country would do.
That’s what we’re doing today. And tomorrow, we should do more. And we should do morethe day after that. And if we do, we’ll leave behind a nation that’s stronger than the one weinherited and worthy of the sacrifice of a young man like Zaevion. 
Thank you very much, everybody. God bless you. Thank you. God bless America.
