Well, good afternoon, everybody.  And, President Clinton, thank you for your very kindintroduction.  Although I have to admit, I really did like the speech a few weeks ago a little bitbetter.  Afterwards, somebody tweeted that somebody needs to make him "Secretary ofExplaining Things."  Although they didn’t use the word, "things."
President Clinton, you are a tireless, passionate advocate on behalf of what's best in ourcountry.  You have helped to improve and save the lives of millions of people around theworld.  I am grateful for your friendship and your extraordinary leadership.  And I think Ispeak for the entire country when we say that you continue to be a great treasure for all ofus.
As always, I also have to thank President Clinton for being so understanding with the record-
breaking number of countries visited by our Secretary of State.  As we’ve seen again in recentdays, Hillary Clinton is a leader of grace and grit -- and I believe she will go down as one ofthe finest Secretaries of State in American history.  So we are grateful to her.
To the dedicated CGI staff and every organization that's made commitments and touched thelives of hundreds of millions of people, thank you for being an example of what we need moreof in the world, especially in Washington -- working together to actually solve problems. 
  
And that’s why I’m here.  As Bill mentioned, I’ve come to CGI every year that I’ve beenPresident, and I’ve talked with you about how we need to sustain the economic recovery, howwe need to create more jobs.  I’ve talked about the importance of development -- from globalhealth to our fight against HIV/AIDS to the growth that lifts nations to prosperity.  We'vetalked about development and how it has to include women and girls -- because by everybenchmark, nations that educate their women and girls end up being more successful.
And today, I want to discuss an issue that relates to each of these challenges.  It ought toconcern every person, because it is a debasement of our common humanity.  It ought toconcern every community, because it tears at our social fabric.  It ought to concern everybusiness, because it distorts markets.  It ought to concern every nation, because it endangerspublic health and fuels violence and organized crime.  I’m talking about the injustice, theoutrage, of human trafficking, which must be called by its true name -- modern slavery.
Now, I do not use that word, "slavery" lightly.  It evokes obviously one of the most painfulchapters in our nation’s history.  But around the world, there’s no denying the awful reality. When a man, desperate for work, finds himself in a factory or on a fishing boat or in a field,working, toiling, for little or no pay, and beaten if he tries to escape -- that is slavery.  When awoman is locked in a sweatshop, or trapped in a home as a domestic servant, alone andabused and incapable of leaving -- that’s slavery.
When a little boy is kidnapped, turned into a child soldier, forced to kill or be killed -- that’sslavery.  When a little girl is sold by her impoverished family -- girls my daughters’ age --runs away from home, or is lured by the false promises of a better life, and then imprisoned ina brothel and tortured if she resists -- that’s slavery.  It is barbaric, and it is evil, and it has noplace in a civilized world.
Now, as a nation, we’ve long rejected such cruelty.  Just a few days ago, we marked the150th anniversary of a document that I have hanging in the Oval Office -- the EmancipationProclamation.  With the advance of Union forces, it brought a new day -- that "all persons heldas slaves" would thenceforth be forever free.  We wrote that promise into our Constitution. We spent decades struggling to make it real.  We joined with other nations, in the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, so that "slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in alltheir forms."
A global movement was sparked, with the Trafficking Victims Protection Act -- signed byPresident Clinton and carried on by President Bush. 
And here at CGI, you’ve made impressive commitments in this fight.  We are especiallyhonored to be joined today by advocates who dedicate their lives -- and, at times, risk theirlives -- to liberate victims and help them recover.  This includes men and women of faith,who, like the great abolitionists before them, are truly doing the Lord’s work -- evangelicals,the Catholic Church, International Justice Mission and World Relief, even individualcongregations, like Passion City Church in Atlanta, and so many young people of faith who've
  
decided that their conscience compels them to act in the face of injustice.  Groups like theseare answering the Bible’s call -- to "seek justice" and "rescue the oppressed."  Some of themjoin us today, and we are grateful for your leadership.
Now, as President, I’ve made it clear that the United States will continue to be a leader in thisglobal movement.  We’ve got a comprehensive strategy.  We’re shining a spotlight on thedark corners where it persists.  Under Hillary’s leadership, we’re doing more than ever -- withour annual trafficking report, with new outreach and partnerships -- to give countriesincentives to meet their responsibilities and calling them out when they don’t.
I recently renewed sanctions on some of the worst abusers, including North Korea andEritrea.  We’re partnering with groups that help women and children escape from the grip oftheir abusers.  We’re helping other countries step up their own efforts.  And we’re seeingresults.  More nations have passed and more are enforcing modern anti-trafficking laws.
Last week I was proud to welcome to the Oval Office not only a great champion of democracybut a fierce advocate against the use of forced labor and child soldiers -- Aung San Suu Kyi. And as part of our engagement, we’ll encourage Burma to keep taking steps to reform --because nations must speak with one voice:  Our people and our children are not for sale.
But for all the progress that we’ve made, the bitter truth is that trafficking also goes on righthere, in the United States.  It’s the migrant worker unable to pay off the debt to histrafficker.  The man, lured here with the promise of a job, his documents then taken, andforced to work endless hours in a kitchen.  The teenage girl, beaten, forced to walk thestreets.  This should not be happening in the United States of America.
As President, I directed my administration to step up our efforts -- and we have.  For the firsttime, at Hillary’s direction, our annual trafficking report now includes the United States,because we can’t ask other nations to do what we are not doing ourselves.  We’ve expandedour interagency task force to include more federal partners, including the FBI.  Theintelligence community is devoting more resources to identifying trafficking networks.  We’vestrengthened protections so that foreign-born workers know their rights.
And most of all, we’re going after the traffickers.  New anti-trafficking teams are dismantlingtheir networks.  Last year, we charged a record number of these predators with humantrafficking.  We’re putting them where they belong -- behind bars.
But with more than 20 million victims of human trafficking around the world -- think aboutthat, more than 20 million -- they’ve got a lot more to do.  And that’s why, earlier this year, Idirected my administration to increase our efforts.  And today, I can announce a series ofadditional steps that we’re going to take.
  
First, we’re going to do more to spot it and stop it.  We’ll prepare a new assessment of humantrafficking in the United States so we better understand the scope and scale of the problem. We’ll strengthen training, so investigators and law enforcement are even better equipped totake action -- and treat victims as victims, not as criminals.  We’re going to work with Amtrak,and bus and truck inspectors, so that they’re on the lookout.  We’ll help teachers andeducators spot the signs as well, and better serve those who are vulnerable, especially ouryoung people.
Second, we’re turning the tables on the traffickers.  Just as they are now using technologyand the Internet to exploit their victims, we’re going to harness technology to stop them. We’re encouraging tech companies and advocates and law enforcement -- and we’re alsochallenging college students -- to develop tools that our young people can use to stay safeonline and on their smart phones.
Third, we’ll do even more to help victims recover and rebuild their lives.  We’ll develop a newaction plan to improve coordination across the federal government.  We’re increasing accessto services to help survivors become self-sufficient.  We’re working to simplify visa proceduresfor "T" visas so that innocent victims from other countries can stay here as they help usprosecute their traffickers.
This coming year, my Office of Faith-based and Neighborhood Partnerships will make the fightagainst human trafficking a focus of its work.  They’re doing great work.  And I’m also proudto announce a new partnership with Humanity United, which is a leader in anti-trafficking -- amulti-million dollar challenge to local communities to find new ways to care for traffickingvictims.  And I want to thank Johns Hopkins University, which will be focusing on how to bestcare for child victims.
Now, finally, as one of the largest purchasers of goods and services in the world, the UnitedStates government will lead by example.  We’ve already taken steps to make sure ourcontractors do not engage in forced labor.  And today we’re going to go  further.  I’ve signed anew executive order that raises the bar. It’s specific about the prohibitions.  It does more toprotect workers.  It ensures stronger compliance.   In short, we’re making clear that Americantax dollars must never, ever be used to support the trafficking of human beings.  We will havezero tolerance.  We mean what we say.  We will enforce it.
Of course, no government, no nation, can meet this challenge alone.  Everybody has aresponsibility.  Every nation can take action.  Modern anti-trafficking laws must be passed andenforced and justice systems must be strengthened.  Victims must be cared for.  So here inthe United States, Congress should renew the Trafficking Victims Protection Act.  Whether youare a conservative or a liberal, Democrat or Republican, this is a no-brainer.  This issomething we should all agree on.  We need to get that done.
  
And more broadly, as nations, let’s recommit to addressing the underlying forces that push somany into bondage in the first place.  With development and economic growth that createslegitimate jobs, there’s less likelihood of indentured servitude around the globe.  A sense ofjustice that says no child should ever be exploited, that has to be burned into the cultures ofevery country.  A commitment to equality -- as in the Equal Futures Partnership that welaunched with other nations yesterday so societies empower our sisters and our daughtersjust as much as our brothers and sons.
And every business can take action.  All the business leaders who are here and our globaleconomy companies have a responsibility to make sure that their supply chains, stretchinginto the far corners of the globe, are free of forced labor. The good news is more and moreresponsible companies are holding themselves to higher standards.  And today, I want tosalute the new commitments that are being made.  That includes the new Global BusinessCoalition Against Trafficking -- companies that are sending a message:  Human trafficking isnot a business model, it is a crime, and we are going to stop it.  We’re proud of them.
Every faith community can take action as well, by educating their congregations, by joining incoalitions that are bound by a love of God and a concern for the oppressed.  And like thatGood Samaritan on the road to Jericho, we can’t just pass by, indifferent.  We’ve got to bemoved by compassion.  We’ve got to bind up the wounds.  Let’s come together around asimple truth -- that we are our brother’s keepers and we are our sister’s keepers.
And finally, every citizen can take action:  by learning more; by going to the website that wehelped create -- SlaveryFootprint.org; by speaking up and insisting that the clothes we wear,the food we eat, the products we buy are made free of forced labor; by standing up againstthe degradation and abuse of women.
That’s how real change happens -- from the bottom up.  And if you doubt that, ask MarieGodet Niyonyota, from the Congo.  Think about Marie’s story.  She was kidnapped by rebels,turned into a slave.  She was abused -- physically and sexually.  They got her pregnant fivetimes.  In one awful battle, her children were killed -- all five of them.  Miraculously, shesurvived and escaped.  And with care and support, she began to heal.  And she learned toread and write and sew, and today Marie is back home, working toward a new future.
Or ask Ima Matul.  She grew up in Indonesia, and at 17 was given the opportunity to work asa nanny here in the United States.  But when she arrived, it turned out to be a nightmare. Cooking, cleaning -- 18-hour days, seven days a week.  One beating was so bad it sent her tothe emergency room.  And finally, she escaped.  And with the help from a group that cared,today Ima has a stable job.  She’s an advocate -- she’s even testified before Congress.
Or ask Sheila White, who grew up in the Bronx.  Fleeing an abusive home, she fell in with aguy who said he’d protect her.  Instead, he sold her -- just 15 years old -- 15 -- to men whoraped her and beat her, and burned her with irons.
  
And finally, after years -- with the help of a non-profit led by other survivors -- she found thecourage to break free and get the services she needed.  Sheila earned her GED.  Today she isa powerful, fierce advocate who helped to pass a new anti-trafficking law right here in NewYork.
These women endured unspeakable horror.  But in their unbreakable will, in their courage, intheir resilience, they remind us that this cycle can be broken; victims can become not onlysurvivors, they can become leaders and advocates, and bring about change.
And I just met Ima and Sheila and several of their fellow advocates, and I have to tell youthey are an incredible inspiration.  They are here -- they’ve chosen to tell their stories.  I wantthem to stand and be recognized because they are inspiring all of us.  Please -- Sheila, Ima.
To Ima and Sheila, and each of you -- in the darkest hours of your lives, you may have feltutterly alone, and it seemed like nobody cared.  And the important thing for us to understandis there are millions around the world who are feeling that same way at this very moment.
Right now, there is a man on a boat, casting the net with his bleeding hands, knowing hedeserves a better life, a life of dignity, but doesn’t know if anybody is paying attention.  Rightnow, there’s a woman, hunched over a sewing machine, glancing beyond the bars on thewindow, knowing if just given the chance, she might some day sell her own wares, but shedoesn’t think anybody is paying attention.  Right now, there’s a young boy, in a brick factory,covered in dust, hauling his heavy load under a blazing sun, thinking if he could just go toschool, he might know a different future, but he doesn’t think anybody is paying attention. Right now, there is a girl, somewhere trapped in a brothel, crying herself to sleep again, andmaybe daring to imagine that some day, just maybe, she might be treated not like a piece ofproperty, but as a human being.
And so our message today, to them, is -- to the millions around the world -- we see you.  Wehear you.  We insist on your dignity.  And we share your belief that if just given the chance,you will forge a life equal to your talents and worthy of your dreams.
Our fight against human trafficking is one of the great human rights causes of our time, andthe United States will continue to lead it -- in partnership with you.  The change we seek willnot come easy, but we can draw strength from the movements of the past.  For we know thatevery life saved -- in the words of that great Proclamation -- is "an act of justice," worthy of"the considerate judgment of mankind, and the gracious favor of Almighty God."
That’s what we believe.  That’s what we're fighting for.  And I'm so proud to be in partnershipwith CGI to make this happen.
Thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you.  God bless America.
