Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, my fellow delegates, ladies and gentlemen.  It is a greathonor to address this Assembly for the second time, nearly two years after my election asPresident of the United States.
We know this is no ordinary time for our people.  Each of us comes here with our ownproblems and priorities.  But there are also challenges that we share in common as leadersand as nations.
We meet within an institution built from the rubble of war, designed to unite the world inpursuit of peace.  And we meet within a city that for centuries has welcomed people fromacross the globe, demonstrating that individuals of every color, faith and station can cometogether to pursue opportunity, build a community, and live with the blessing of humanliberty.
Outside the doors of this hall, the blocks and neighborhoods of this great city tell the story ofa difficult decade.  Nine years ago, the destruction of the World Trade Center signaled a threatthat respected no boundary of dignity or decency.  Two years ago this month, a financial crisison Wall Street devastated American families on Main Street.  These separate challenges haveaffected people around the globe.  Men and women and children have been murdered byextremists from Casablanca to London; from Jalalabad to Jakarta.  The global economysuffered an enormous blow during the financial crisis, crippling markets and deferring thedreams of millions on every continent.
  
Underneath these challenges to our security and prosperity lie deeper fears:  that ancienthatreds and religious divides are once again ascendant; that a world which has grown moreinterconnected has somehow slipped beyond our control.
These are some of the challenges that my administration has confronted since we came intooffice.  And today, I’d like to talk to you about what we’ve done over the last 20 months tomeet these challenges; what our responsibility is to pursue peace in the Middle East; and whatkind of world we are trying to build in this 21st century.
Let me begin with what we have done.  I have had no greater focus as President thanrescuing our economy from potential catastrophe.  And in an age when prosperity is shared,we could not do this alone.  So America has joined with nations around the world to spurgrowth, and the renewed demand that could restart job creation.
We are reforming our system of global finance, beginning with Wall Street reform here athome, so that a crisis like this never happens again.  And we made the G20 the focal point forinternational coordination, because in a world where prosperity is more diffuse, we mustbroaden our circle of cooperation to include emerging economies -- economies from everycorner of the globe.
There is much to show for our efforts, even as there is much work to be done.  The globaleconomy has been pulled back from the brink of a depression, and is growing once more.  Wehave resisted protectionism, and are exploring ways to expand trade and commerce amongnations.  But we cannot -- and will not -- rest until these seeds of progress grow into abroader prosperity, not only for all Americans, but for peoples around the globe.
As for our common security, America is waging a more effective fight against al Qaeda, whilewinding down the war in Iraq.  Since I took office, the United States has removed nearly100,000 troops from Iraq.  We have done so responsibly, as Iraqis have transitioned to leadresponsibility for the security of their country.
We are now focused on building a lasting partnership with the Iraqi people, while keeping ourcommitment to remove the rest of our troops by the end of next year.
While drawing down in Iraq, we have refocused on defeating al Qaeda and denying itsaffiliates a safe haven.  In Afghanistan, the United States and our allies are pursuing astrategy to break the Taliban’s momentum and build the capacity of Afghanistan’s governmentand security forces, so that a transition to Afghan responsibility can begin next July.  And fromSouth Asia to the Horn of Africa, we are moving toward a more targeted approach -- one thatstrengthens our partners and dismantles terrorist networks without deploying large Americanarmies.
  
As we pursue the world’s most dangerous extremists, we’re also denying them the world’smost dangerous weapons, and pursuing the peace and security of a world without nuclearweapons.
Earlier this year, 47 nations embraced a work-plan to secure all vulnerable nuclear materialswithin four years.  We have joined with Russia to sign the most comprehensive arms controltreaty in decades.  We have reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security strategy. And here, at the United Nations, we came together to strengthen the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty.
As part of our effort on non-proliferation, I offered the Islamic Republic of Iran an extendedhand last year, and underscored that it has both rights and responsibilities as a member ofthe international community.  I also said -- in this hall -- that Iran must be held accountable ifit failed to meet those responsibilities.  And that is what we have done.
Iran is the only party to the NPT that cannot demonstrate the peaceful intentions of its nuclearprogram, and those actions have consequences.  Through U.N. Security Council Resolution1929, we made it clear that international law is not an empty promise.
Now let me be clear once more:  The United States and the international community seek aresolution to our differences with Iran, and the door remains open to diplomacy should Iranchoose to walk through it.  But the Iranian government must demonstrate a clear and crediblecommitment and confirm to the world the peaceful intent of its nuclear program.
As we combat the spread of deadly weapons, we’re also confronting the specter of climatechange.  After making historic investments in clean energy and efficiency at home, we helpedforge an accord in Copenhagen that -- for the first time -- commits all major economies toreduce their emissions.  We are keenly aware this is just a first step.  And going forward, wewill support a process in which all major economies meet our responsibilities to protect theplanet while unleashing the power of clean energy to serve as an engine of growth anddevelopment.
America has also embraced unique responsibilities with come -- that come with our power. Since the rains came and the floodwaters rose in Pakistan, we have pledged our assistance,and we should all support the Pakistani people as they recover and rebuild.  And when theearth shook and Haiti was devastated by loss, we joined a coalition of nations in response. Today, we honor those from the U.N. family who lost their lives in the earthquake, andcommit ourselves to stand with the people of Haiti until they can stand on their own two feet.
Amidst this upheaval, we have also been persistent in our pursuit of peace.  Last year, Ipledged my best efforts to support the goal of two states, Israel and Palestine, living side byside in peace and security, as part of a comprehensive peace between Israel and all of itsneighbors.
  
We have travelled a winding road over the last 12 months, with few peaks and many valleys. But this month, I am pleased that we have pursued direct negotiations between Israelis andPalestinians in Washington, Sharm el Sheikh and Jerusalem.
Now I recognize many are pessimistic about this process.  The cynics say that Israelis andPalestinians are too distrustful of each other, and too divided internally, to forge lastingpeace.  Rejectionists on both sides will try to disrupt the process, with bitter words and withbombs and with gunfire.  Some say that the gaps between the parties are too big; thepotential for talks to break down is too great; and that after decades of failure, peace issimply not possible.
I hear those voices of skepticism.  But I ask you to consider the alternative.  If an agreementis not reached, Palestinians will never know the pride and dignity that comes with their ownstate.  Israelis will never know the certainty and security that comes with sovereign and stableneighbors who are committed to coexistence.  The hard realities of demography will takehold.  More blood will be shed.  This Holy Land will remain a symbol of our differences, insteadof our common humanity.
I refuse to accept that future.  And we all have a choice to make.  Each of us must choose thepath of peace.  Of course, that responsibility begins with the parties themselves, who mustanswer the call of history.  Earlier this month at the White House, I was struck by the words ofboth the Israeli and Palestinian leaders.  Prime Minister Netanyahu said, “I came here today tofind a historic compromise that will enable both people to live in peace, security, and dignity.” And President Abbas said, “We will spare no effort and we will work diligently and tirelessly toensure these negotiations achieve their cause.”
These words must now be followed by action and I believe that both leaders have the courageto do so.  But the road that they have to travel is exceedingly difficult, which is why I callupon Israelis and Palestinians -- and the world -- to rally behind the goal that these leadersnow share.  We know that there will be tests along the way and that one test is fastapproaching.  Israel’s settlement moratorium has made a difference on the ground andimproved the atmosphere for talks.
And our position on this issue is well known.  We believe that the moratorium should beextended.  We also believe that talks should press on until completed.  Now is the time for theparties to help each other overcome this obstacle.  Now is the time to build the trust -- andprovide the time -- for substantial progress to be made.  Now is the time for this opportunityto be seized, so that it does not slip away.
Now, peace must be made by Israelis and Palestinians, but each of us has a responsibility todo our part as well. Those of us who are friends of Israel must understand that true securityfor the Jewish state requires an independent Palestine -- one that allows the Palestinianpeople to live with dignity and opportunity.
  
And those of us who are friends of the Palestinians must understand that the rights of thePalestinian people will be won only through peaceful means -- including genuine reconciliationwith a secure Israel.
I know many in this hall count themselves as friends of the Palestinians.  But these pledges offriendship must now be supported by deeds.  Those who have signed on to the Arab PeaceInitiative should seize this opportunity to make it real by taking tangible steps towards thenormalization that it promises Israel.
And those who speak on behalf of Palestinian self-government should help the PalestinianAuthority politically and financially, and in doing so help the Palestinians build the institutionsof their state.
Those who long to see an independent Palestine must also stop trying to tear down Israel. After thousands of years, Jews and Arabs are not strangers in a strange land.  After 60 yearsin the community of nations, Israel’s existence must not be a subject for debate.
Israel is a sovereign state, and the historic homeland of the Jewish people.  It should be clearto all that efforts to chip away at Israel’s legitimacy will only be met by the unshakeableopposition of the United States.  And efforts to threaten or kill Israelis will do nothing to helpthe Palestinian people.  The slaughter of innocent Israelis is not resistance -- it’s injustice. And make no mistake:  The courage of a man like President Abbas, who stands up for hispeople in front of the world under very difficult circumstances, is far greater than those whofire rockets at innocent women and children.
The conflict between Israelis and Arabs is as old as this institution.  And we can come backhere next year, as we have for the last 60 years, and make long speeches about it.  We canread familiar lists of grievances.  We can table the same resolutions.  We can further empowerthe forces of rejectionism and hate.  And we can waste more time by carrying forward anargument that will not help a single Israeli or Palestinian child achieve a better life.  We cando that.
Or, we can say that this time will be different -- that this time we will not let terror, orturbulence, or posturing, or petty politics stand in the way.  This time, we will think not ofourselves, but of the young girl in Gaza who wants to have no ceiling on her dreams, or theyoung boy in Sderot who wants to sleep without the nightmare of rocket fire.
This time, we should draw upon the teachings of tolerance that lie at the heart of three greatreligions that see Jerusalem’s soil as sacred.  This time we should reach for what’s best withinourselves.  If we do, when we come back here next year, we can have an agreement that willlead to a new member of the United Nations -- an independent, sovereign state of Palestine,living in peace with Israel.
  
It is our destiny to bear the burdens of the challenges that I’ve addressed -- recession andwar and conflict.  And there is always a sense of urgency -- even emergency -- that drivesmost of our foreign policies.  Indeed, after millennia marked by wars, this very institutionreflects the desire of human beings to create a forum to deal with emergencies that willinevitably come.
But even as we confront immediate challenges, we must also summon the foresight to lookbeyond them, and consider what we are trying to build over the long term?  What is the worldthat awaits us when today’s battles are brought to an end?  And that is what I would like totalk about with the remainder of my time today.
One of the first actions of this General Assembly was to adopt a Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights in 1948. That Declaration begins by stating that, “recognition of the inherentdignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is thefoundation of freedom, justice, and peace in the world.”
The idea is a simple one -- that freedom, justice and peace for the world must begin withfreedom, justice, and peace in the lives of individual human beings.  And for the UnitedStates, this is a matter of moral and pragmatic necessity.  As Robert Kennedy said, “theindividual man, the child of God, is the touchstone of value, and all society, groups, the state,exist for his benefit.”  So we stand up for universal values because it’s the right thing to do. But we also know from experience that those who defend these values for their people havebeen our closest friends and allies, while those who have denied those rights -- whetherterrorist groups or tyrannical governments -- have chosen to be our adversaries.
Human rights have never gone unchallenged -- not in any of our nations, and not in ourworld.  Tyranny is still with us -- whether it manifests itself in the Taliban killing girls who tryto go to school, a North Korean regime that enslaves its own people, or an armed group inCongo-Kinshasa that use rape as a weapon of war.
In times of economic unease, there can also be an anxiety about human rights.  Today, as inpast times of economic downturn, some put human rights aside for the promise of short termstability or the false notion that economic growth can come at the expense of freedom.  Wesee leaders abolishing term limits.  We see crackdowns on civil society.  We see corruptionsmothering entrepreneurship and good governance.  We see democratic reforms deferredindefinitely.
As I said last year, each country will pursue a path rooted in the culture of its own people.  Yetexperience shows us that history is on the side of liberty; that the strongest foundation forhuman progress lies in open economies, open societies, and open governments.  To put itsimply, democracy, more than any other form of government, delivers for our citizens.  And Ibelieve that truth will only grow stronger in a world where the borders between nations areblurred.
  
America is working to shape a world that fosters this openness, for the rot of a closed orcorrupt economy must never eclipse the energy and innovation of human beings.  All of uswant the right to educate our children, to make a decent wage, to care for the sick, and to becarried as far as our dreams and our deeds will take us.  But that depends upon economiesthat tap the power of our people, including the potential of women and girls.  That meansletting entrepreneurs start a business without paying a bribe and governments that supportopportunity instead of stealing from their people.  And that means rewarding hard work,instead of reckless risk-taking.
Yesterday, I put forward a new development policy that will pursue these goals, recognizingthat dignity is a human right and global development is in our common interest.  America willpartner with nations that offer their people a path out of poverty.  And together, we mustunleash growth that powers by individuals and emerging markets in all parts of the globe.
There is no reason why Africa should not be an exporter of agriculture, which is why our foodsecurity initiative is empowering farmers.  There is no reason why entrepreneurs shouldn’t beable to build new markets in every society, which is why I hosted a summit onentrepreneurship earlier this spring, because the obligation of government is to empowerindividuals, not to impede them.
The same holds true for civil society.  The arc of human progress has been shaped byindividuals with the freedom to assemble and by organizations outside of government thatinsisted upon democratic change and by free media that held the powerful accountable.  Wehave seen that from the South Africans who stood up to apartheid, to the Poles of Solidarity,to the mothers of the disappeared who spoke out against the Dirty War, to Americans whomarched for the rights of all races, including my own.
Civil society is the conscience of our communities and America will always extend ourengagement abroad with citizens beyond the halls of government.  And we will call out thosewho suppress ideas and serve as a voice for those who are voiceless.  We will promote newtools of communication so people are empowered to connect with one another and, inrepressive societies, to do so with security.  We will support a free and open Internet, soindividuals have the information to make up their own minds.  And it is time to embrace andeffectively monitor norms that advance the rights of civil society and guarantee its expansionwithin and across borders.
Open society supports open government, but it cannot substitute for it.  There is no rightmore fundamental than the ability to choose your leaders and determine your destiny.  Now,make no mistake:  The ultimate success of democracy in the world won’t come because theUnited States dictates it; it will come because individual citizens demand a say in how theyare governed.
  
There is no soil where this notion cannot take root, just as every democracy reflects theuniqueness of a nation.  Later this fall, I will travel to Asia.  And I will visit India, whichpeacefully threw off colonialism and established a thriving democracy of over a billion people.
I’ll continue to Indonesia, the world’s largest Muslim-majority country, which binds togetherthousands of islands through the glue of representative government and civil society.  I’ll jointhe G20 meeting on the Korean Peninsula, which provides the world’s clearest contrastbetween a society that is dynamic and open and free, and one that is imprisoned and closed. And I will conclude my trip in Japan, an ancient culture that found peace and extraordinarydevelopment through democracy.
Each of these countries gives life to democratic principles in their own way.  And even assome governments roll back reform, we also celebrate the courage of a President in Colombiawho willingly stepped aside, or the promise of a new constitution in Kenya.
The common thread of progress is the principle that government is accountable to its citizens. And the diversity in this room makes clear -- no one country has all the answers, but all of usmust answer to our own people.
In all parts of the world, we see the promise of innovation to make government more openand accountable.  And now, we must build on that progress.  And when we gather back herenext year, we should bring specific commitments to promote transparency; to fightcorruption; to energize civic engagement; to leverage new technologies so that we strengthenthe foundations of freedom in our own countries, while living up to the ideals that can light theworld.
This institution can still play an indispensable role in the advance of human rights.  It’s time towelcome the efforts of U.N. Women to protect the rights of women around the globe.
It’s time for every member state to open its elections to international monitors and increasethe U.N. Democracy Fund.  It’s time to reinvigorate U.N. peacekeeping, so that missions havethe resources necessary to succeed, and so atrocities like sexual violence are prevented andjustice is enforced -- because neither dignity nor democracy can thrive without basic security.
And it’s time to make this institution more accountable as well, because the challenges of anew century demand new ways of serving our common interests.
The world that America seeks is not one we can build on our own.  For human rights to reachthose who suffer the boot of oppression, we need your voices to speak out.  In particular, Iappeal to those nations who emerged from tyranny and inspired the world in the second halfof the last century -- from South Africa to South Asia; from Eastern Europe to South America. Don’t stand idly by, don’t be silent, when dissidents elsewhere are imprisoned and protestersare beaten.  Recall your own history.  Because part of the price of our own freedom isstanding up for the freedom of others.
  
That belief will guide America’s leadership in this 21st century.  It is a belief that has seen usthrough more than two centuries of trial, and it will see us through the challenges we facetoday -- be it war or recession; conflict or division.
So even as we have come through a difficult decade, I stand here before you confident in thefuture -- a future where Iraq is governed by neither tyrant nor a foreign power, andAfghanistan is freed from the turmoil of war; a future where the children of Israel andPalestine can build the peace that was not possible for their parents; a world where thepromise of development reaches into the prisons of poverty and disease; a future where thecloud of recession gives way to the light of renewal and the dream of opportunity is availableto all.
This future will not be easy to reach.  It will not come without setbacks, nor will it be quicklyclaimed.  But the founding of the United Nations itself is a testament to human progress. Remember, in times that were far more trying than our own, our predecessors chose the hopeof unity over the ease of division and made a promise to future generations that the dignityand equality of human beings would be our common cause.     It falls to us to fulfill that promise.  And though we will be met by dark forces that will test ourresolve, Americans have always had cause to believe that we can choose a better history; thatwe need only to look outside the walls around us.  For through the citizens of everyconceivable ancestry who make this city their own, we see living proof that opportunity can beaccessed by all, that what unites us as human beings is far greater than what divides us, andthat people from every part of this world can live together in peace.
Thank you very much.
