Q:  Mr. President, Governor Romney, as a 20-year-old college student, all I hear fromprofessors, neighbors and others is that when I graduate I'll have little chance to getemployment.  What can you say to reassure me, but more importantly, my parents, that I willbe able to sufficiently support myself after I graduate?
Governor Romney:  Thank you, Jeremy.  I appreciate your question.  And thank you forbeing here this evening.  And to all of those from Nassau County here that have come, thankyou for your time.  Thank you to Hofstra University and to Candy Crowley for organizing andleading this event. Thank you, Mr. President, also for being part of this debate.
Your question is one that's being asked by college kids all over this country.  I was inPennsylvania with someone who had just graduated.  This was in Philadelphia -- and she saidI've got my degree, I can't find a job.  I've got three part-time jobs; they’re just barelyenough to pay for my food and pay for an apartment.  I can't begin to pay back my studentloans. 
Property of 
  
So what we have to do is two things.  We have to make sure that we make it easier for kids toafford college, and also make sure that when they get out of college there’s a job.  When Iwas governor of Massachusetts, to get a high school degree you had to pass an exam.  If yougraduated in the top quarter of your class, we gave you a John and Abigail Adams scholarship-- four years tuition-free to the college of your choice in Massachusetts that's a publicinstitution.
I want to make sure we keep our Pell Grant program growing. We're also going to have ourloan program so that people are able to afford school.  But the key thing is to make sure youcan get a job when you get out of school.  And what’s happened over the last four years hasbeen very, very hard for America’s young people. 
I want you to be able to get a job.  I know what it takes to get this economy going.  With halfof college kids graduating this year without a college -- excuse me -- without a job andwithout a college-level job, that’s just unacceptable.  And likewise, you got more and moredebt on your back.  So more debt and less jobs.  I'm going to change that.  I know what ittakes to create good jobs again.  I know what it takes to make sure that you have the kind ofopportunity you deserve. 
And kids across this country are going to recognize we're bringing back an economy.  It’s notgoing to be like the last four years.  The middle class has been crushed over the last fouryears.  And jobs have been too scarce.  I know what it takes to bring them back, and I'mgoing to do that and make sure when you graduate -- when do you graduate? 
Q:  2014.
Governor Romney:  2014.  When you come out in 2014, I presume I'm going to bePresident -- I'm going to make sure you get a job.  Thanks, Jeremy.
Q:  Thank you.
Governor Romney:  Yeah, you bet. 
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President.
President Obama:  Jeremy, first of all, your future is bright. And the fact that you’re makingan investment in higher education is critical not just to you, but to the entire nation.  Now, themost important thing we can do is to make sure that we are creating jobs in this country, butnot just jobs -- good-paying jobs, ones that can support a family.
And what I want to do is build on the 5 million jobs that we’ve created over the last 30months in the private sector alone.  And there are a bunch of things that we can do to makesure your future is bright.
Property of 
  
Number one:  I want to build manufacturing jobs in this country again.  When GovernorRomney said we should let Detroit go bankrupt, I said, we’re going to bet on Americanworkers and the American auto industry, and it’s come surging back.  I want to do that inindustries not just in Detroit but all across the country.  And that means we change our taxcode so we’re giving incentives to companies that are investing here in the United States andcreating jobs here.  It also means we’re helping them and small businesses to export allaround the world to new markets.
Number two:  We’ve got to make sure that we have the best education system in the world. And the fact that you’re going to college is great, but I want everybody to get a greateducation. And we’ve worked hard to make sure that student loans are available for folks likeyou.  But I also want to make sure that community colleges are offering slots for workers toget retrained for the jobs that are there right now, and the jobs of the future.
Number three:  We’ve got to control our own energy.  Not only oil and natural gas, whichwe’ve been investing in, but also we’ve got to make sure we’re building the energy sources ofthe future -- not just thinking about next year, but 10 years from now, 20 years from now. That's why we invest in solar and wind and biofuels, energy-efficient cars.
We’ve got to reduce our deficit, but we’ve got to do it in a balanced way -- asking the wealthyto pay a little bit more along with cuts so that we can invest in education like yours.  And let’stake the money that we’ve been spending on war over the last decade to rebuild America --roads, bridges, schools.  We do those things, not only is your future going to be bright, butAmerica’s future is going to be bright as well.
Ms. Crowley:  Let me ask you for a more immediate answer, beginning with Mr. Romney. Just quickly, what can you do?  We’re looking at a situation where 40 percent of theunemployed have been unemployed for six months or more.  They don't have the two yearsthat Jeremy has.  What about those long-term unemployed who need a job right now?
Governor Romney:  Well, what you're seeing in this country is 23 million people strugglingto find a job and a lot of them, as you say, Candy, have been out of work for a long, long,long time.  The President’s policies have been exercised over the last four years and theyhaven’t put Americans back to work.  We have fewer people working today than we had whenthe President took office.  If the -- the unemployment rate was 7.8 percent when he tookoffice; it’s 7.8 percent now.  But if you calculated that unemployment rate taking back thepeople who dropped out of the workforce, it would be 10.7 percent. 
We have not made the progress we need to make to put people back to work.  That's why Iput out a five-point plan that gets America 12 million new jobs in four years and rising take-
home pay.  It’s going to help Jeremy get a job when he comes out of school.  It’s going tohelp people across the country that are unemployed right now. 
Property of 
  
And one thing that the President said, which I want to make sure that we understand -- hesaid that I said we should take Detroit bankrupt.  And that's right.  My plan was to have thecompany go through bankruptcy like 7-Eleven did and Macy's and Continental Airlines, andcome out stronger.  And I know he keeps saying, you wanted to take Detroit bankrupt.  Well,the President took Detroit bankrupt.  You took General Motors bankrupt.  You took Chryslerbankrupt.  So when you say that I wanted to take the auto industry bankrupt, you actuallydid. 
And I think it's important to know that was a process that was necessary to get thosecompanies back on their feet so they could start hiring more people.  That was precisely whatI recommended and ultimately what happened.
Ms. Crowley:  Let me give the President a chance.  Go ahead.
President Obama:  Candy, what Governor Romney said just isn't true.  He wanted to takethem into bankruptcy without providing them any way to stay open, and we would have lost amillion jobs. And don't take my word for it.  Take the executives at GM and Chrysler, some ofwhom are Republicans, may even support Governor Romney, but they'll tell you hisprescription wasn't going to work.
And Governor Romney says he's got a five-point plan.  Governor Romney doesn't have a five-
point plan; he has a one-point plan.  And that plan is to make sure that folks at the top playby a different set of rules.  That's been his philosophy in the private sector.  That's been hisphilosophy as governor.  That's been his philosophy as a presidential candidate.  You canmake a lot of money and pay lower tax rates than somebody who makes a lot less.  You canship jobs overseas and get tax breaks for it.  You can invest in a company, bankrupt it, lay offthe workers, strip away their pensions and you still make money. 
That's exactly the philosophy that we've seen in place for the last decade.  That's what's beensqueezing middle-class families.  And we have fought back for four years to get out of thatmess.  The last thing we need to do is to go back to the very same policies that got us there. 
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, the next question is going to be for you here.  And Mr. Romney-- Governor Romney, they'll be plenty of chances here to go on, but I want to --
Governor Romney:  That Detroit answer --
Ms. Crowley:  -- we have all these folks -- I will let you absolutely --
Governor Romney:  -- and the rest of the answer, way off the mark.
Property of 
  
Ms. Crowley:  Okay.  You certainly will have lots of time here coming up, because I want tomove you on to something that's sort of connected to cars here and go over -- and we want toget a question from Phillip DiCola [ph]. 
Q:  Your Energy Secretary, Steven Chu, has now been on record three times stating it's notpolicy of his department to help lower gas prices.  Do you agree with Secretary Chu that thisis not the job of the Energy Department?
President Obama:  The most important thing we can do is to make sure we control our ownenergy.  So here's what I've done since I've been President.  We have increased oil productionto the highest levels in 16 years.  Natural gas production is the highest it's been in decades. We have seen increases in coal production and coal employment. 
But what I've also said is we can't just produce traditional sources of energy.  We've also gotto look to the future.  That's why we doubled fuel-efficiency standards on cars.  That meansthat in the middle of the next decade, any car you buy you're going to end up going twice asfar on a gallon of gas.  That's why we've doubled clean energy production like wind and solarand biofuels.
And all these things have contributed to us lowering our oil imports to the lowest levels in 16years.  Now, I want to build on that.  And that means, yes, we still continue to open up newareas for drilling.  We continue to make it a priority for us to go after natural gas.  We've gotpotentially 600,000 jobs and a hundred years' worth of energy right beneath our feet withnatural gas.  And we can do it in an environmentally sound way.
But we've also got to continue to figure out how we have efficient energy, because ultimatelythat's how we're going to reduce demand and that's what's going to keep gas prices lower. 
Now, Governor Romney will say he's got an all-of-the-above plan.  But basically, his plan is tolet the oil companies write the energy policies.  So he's got the oil and gas part, but hedoesn't have the clean energy part. 
And if we’re only thinking about tomorrow or the next day, and not thinking about 10 yearsfrom now, we're not going to control our own economic future.  Because China, Germany --they're making these investments.  And I'm not going to cede those jobs of the future tothose countries.  I expect those new energy sources to be built right here in the UnitedStates.  That's going to help Jeremy get a job.  It's also going to make sure that you're notpaying as much for gas.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor, on the subject of gas prices?
Governor Romney:  Well, let's look at the President's policies, all right, as opposed to therhetoric, because we've had four years of policies being played out.  And the President is rightin terms of the additional oil production, but none of it came on federal land. 
Property of 
  
As a matter of fact, oil production is down 14 percent this year on federal land, and gasproduction is down 9 percent.  Why? Because the President cut in half the number of licensesand permits for drilling on federal lands and in federal waters.  So where did the increasecome from?  Well, a lot of it came from the Bakken Range in North Dakota.  What was hisparticipation there?  The America brought a criminal action against the people drilling up therefor oil -- this massive new resource we have.  And what was the cause?  Twenty or 25 birdswere killed and they brought out a migratory bird act to go after them on a criminal basis.
Look, I want to make sure we use our oil, our coal, our gas, our nuclear, our renewables.  Ibelieve very much in our renewable capabilities -- ethanol, wind, solar -- would be animportant part of our energy mix.  But what we don't need is to have the President keeping usfrom taking advantage of oil, coal and gas.  This has not been Mr. Oil or Mr. Gas or Mr. Coal. Talk to the people that are working in those industries. 
I was in coal country.  People grabbed my arms and say, please save my job.  The head of theEPA said you can't build a coal plant, it’s virtually impossible given our regulations.  When thePresident ran for office, he said, if you build a coal plant you can go ahead, but you’ll gobankrupt.  That's not the right course for America.  Let’s take advantage of the energyresources we have as well as the energy sources for the future.  And if we do that, if we dowhat I'm planning on doing, which is getting us energy-independent -- North America energyindependence within eight years -- you’re going to see manufacturing jobs come back,because our energy is low-cost.  They’re already beginning to come back, because of ourabundant energy.
I'll get America and North America energy independent.  I'll do it by more drilling, morepermits and licenses.  We're going to bring that pipeline in from Canada.  How in the worldthe President said no to that pipeline I will never know.  This is about bringing good jobs backfor the middle class of America and that's what I'm going to do.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, let me just see if I can move you to the gist of this question,which is are we looking at the new normal?  I can tell you that tomorrow morning a lot ofpeople in Hempstead will wake up and fill up and they will find that the price of gas is over $4a gallon.  Is it within the purview of the government to bring those prices down, or are welooking at the new normal?
President Obama:  Candy, there’s no doubt that world demand has gone up.  But ourproduction is going up.  And we're using oil more efficiently.  And very little of what GovernorRomney just said is true.
We've opened up public lands.  We're actually drilling more on public lands than in theprevious administration -- and the previous President was an oil man.  And natural gas isn'tjust appearing magically -- we're encouraging it and working with the industry.
Property of 
  
And when I hear Governor Romney say he’s a big coal guy -- and keep in mind, when --Governor, when you were governor of Massachusetts, you stood in front of a coal plant andpointed at it and said, “This plant kills” -- and took great pride in shutting it down.  And nowsuddenly you’re a big champion of coal.
So what I've tried to do is be consistent.  With respect to something like coal, we made thelargest investment in clean-coal technology to make sure that even as we're producing morecoal, we're producing it cleaner and smarter.  Same thing with oil.  Same thing with naturalgas.
And the proof is our oil imports are down to the lowest levels in 20 years.  Oil production isup; natural gas production is up; and most importantly, we're also starting to build cars thatare more efficient.  And that's creating jobs.  That means those cars can be exported becausethat's the demand around the world, and it also means that it will save money in yourpocketbook.  That's the strategy you need, an all-of-the-above strategy, and that's what we'regoing to do in the next four years.
Governor Romney:  But that's not what you’ve done in the last four years.  That's theproblem.  In the last four years you cut permits and licenses on federal land and federalwaters in half. 
President Obama:  Not true, Governor Romney.
Governor Romney:  So how much did you cut it by --
President Obama:  Not true.
Governor Romney:  By how much did you cut them by then?
President Obama:  Governor, we have actually produced more oil --
Governor Romney:  No, no, how much did you cut licenses and permits on federal land andfederal waters?
President Obama:  Governor Romney, here’s what we did:  There were a whole bunch of oilcompanies --
Governor Romney:  No, I had a question, and the question was how much did you cut themby?  How much did you cut them by?
President Obama:  You want me to answer a question, I'm happy to answer the question.
Governor Romney:  All right, and it is?
Property of 
  
President Obama:  Here’s what happened:  You had a whole bunch of oil companies whohad leases on public lands that they weren’t using.  So what we said was, you can’t just sit onthis for 10, 20, 30 years, decide when you want to drill, when you want to produce, when it’smost profitable for you.  These are public lands, so if you want to drill on public lands, you useit or you lose it.  And so what we did was take away those leases, and we are now re-lettingthem so that we can actually make a profit.
Governor Romney:  And production on private -- on government lands is down.
President Obama:  And production is up.  No it isn’t.
Governor Romney:  Production on government land of oil is down 14 percent --
President Obama:  Governor --
Governor Romney:  -- and production of gas is down 9 percent. 
President Obama:  -- what you’re saying is just not true.  It’s just not true.
Governor Romney:  It’s absolutely true.  Look, there’s no question but that the peoplerecognize that we have not produced more oil and gas --
President Obama:  I’ll give you your time.  Go ahead.
Governor Romney:  -- on federal lands and in federal waters. And coal -- coal production isnot up; coal jobs are not up.  I was just at a coal facility where some 1,200 people lost theirjobs. The right course for America is to have a true all-of-the-above policy.  I don’t thinkanyone really believes that you’re a person who’s going to be pushing for oil and gas andcoal.  You’ll get your chance in a moment.  I’m still speaking.
President Obama:  Well, Governor, if you --
Governor Romney:  And the answer is, I don’t believe people think that’s the case because I--
President Obama:  -- if you’re asking me a question, I’m going to answer it.
Governor Romney:  It wasn’t a question.
President Obama:  Okay.  All right.
Property of 
  
Governor Romney:  That was a statement.  I don’t think the American people believe that.  Iwill fight for oil, coal and natural gas.  And the proof of whether a strategy is working or not iswhat the price is that you’re paying at the pump.  If you’re paying less than you paid a year ortwo ago, why, then, the strategy is working.  But you’re paying more.
When the President took office, the price of gasoline here in Nassau County was about a buck-
eighty-six a gallon.  Now it’s four bucks a gallon.  The price of electricity is up.  If thePresident’s energy policies are working, you’re going to see the cost of energy come down. 
I will fight to create more energy in this country to get America energy secure, and part ofthat is bringing in a pipeline of oil from Canada, taking advantage of the oil and coal we havehere; drilling offshore in Alaska; drilling offshore in Virginia, where the people want it.  Thosethings will get us the energy we need.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, could you address -- because we did finally get to gas priceshere -- could you address what the Governor said, which is if your energy policy was working,the price of gasoline would not be $4 a gallon here.  Is that true?
President Obama:  Well, think about what the Governor just said.  He said, when I tookoffice the price of gasoline was $1.80, $1.86.  Why is that?  Because the economy was on theverge of collapse.  Because we were about to go through the worst recession since the GreatDepression, as a consequence of some of the same policies that Governor Romney is nowpromoting. So it’s conceivable that Governor Romney could bring down gas prices, becausewith his policies we might be back in that same mess. 
What I want to do is to create an economy that is strong and at the same time produceenergy.  And with respect to this pipeline that Governor Romney keeps on talking about --we've built enough pipeline to wrap around the entire Earth once.  So I’m all for pipelines. I’m all for oil production.  What I’m not for is us ignoring the other half of the equation. 
So, for example, on wind energy, when Governor Romney says these are imaginary jobs,when you’ve got thousands of people right now in Iowa, right now in Colorado, who areworking, creating wind power with good-paying manufacturing jobs, and the RepublicanSenator in Iowa is all for it, providing tax credits to help this work.  And Governor Romneysays, I’m opposed; I’d get rid of it. That’s not an energy strategy for the future.  And we needto win that future.  And I intend to win it as President of the United States.
Ms. Crowley:  I’ve got to move you along.  And the next question is for you.
Governor Romney:  No, he got the first -- he actually got the first question, so I get the lastquestion -- last answer on that one. 
Property of 
  
Ms. Crowley:  Actually in the follow-up it doesn’t quite work like that.  But I’m going to giveyou a chance here.  I promise you, I’m going to.  And the next question is for you, so if youwant to continue on.  But I don’t want to leave all these guys sitting here.
Governor Romney:  Candy, I don’t have a policy of stopping wind jobs in Iowa.  And they’renot phantom jobs, they’re real jobs.  I appreciate wind jobs in Iowa and across our country.  Iappreciate the jobs in coal and oil and gas. 
Ms. Crowley:  Okay, thank you --
Governor Romney:  I’m going to make sure that taking advantage of our energy resourceswill bring back manufacturing to America.  We’re going to get through a very aggressiveenergy policy -- 3.5 million more jobs in this country.  It’s critical to our future.
President Obama:  Candy, it’s okay, I’m used to being interrupted.
Ms. Crowley:  We’re going to move you along to taxes.  All right, we’re going to move youboth along to taxes over here and all these folks that have been waiting.  Governor, thisquestion is for you.  It comes from Mary Polano [ph]. 
Governor Romney:  Hi, Mary.
Q:  Governor Romney, you have stated that if you’re elected President you would plan toreduce the tax rates for all the tax brackets, and that you would work with the Congress toeliminate some deductions in order to make up for the loss in revenue.  Concerning thesevarious deductions -- the mortgage deduction, the charitable deductions, the Child Tax Credit,and also the -- oh, what’s that other credit? 
President Obama:  You’re doing great.
Q:  Oh, I remember -- the education credits, which are important to me because I havechildren in college.  What would be your position on those things, which are important to themiddle class?
Governor Romney:  Thank you very much.  And let me tell you, you’re absolutely rightabout part of that, which is I want to bring the rates down.  I want to simplify the tax code,and I want to get middle-income taxpayers to have lower taxes.  And the reason I wantmiddle-income taxpayers to have lower taxes is because middle-income taxpayers have beenburied over the past four years. 
Property of 
  
You’ve seen as middle-income people in this country -- incomes go down $4,300 a family,even as gasoline prices have gone up $2,000.  Health insurance premiums up $2,500.  Foodprices up.  Utility prices up.  The middle-income families in America have been crushed overthe last four years, so I want to get some relief to middle-income families.  That's part one.
Now, how about deductions?  Because I’m going to bring rates down across the board foreverybody, but I’m going to limit deductions and exemptions and credits, particularly forpeople at the high end, because I am not going to have people at the high end pay less thanthey're paying now. The top 5 percent of taxpayers will continue to pay 60 percent of theincome tax the nation collects.  So that will stay the same. 
Middle-income people are going to get a tax break.  And so in terms of bringing downdeductions, one way of doing that would be to say everybody gets -- I’ll pick a number --$25,000 of deductions and credits, and you can decide which ones to use.  Your homemortgage interest deduction, charity, child tax credit and so forth, you can use those as partof fill in that bucket, if you will, of deductions.  But your rate comes down, and the burdenalso comes down on you for one more reason, and that is every middle-income taxpayer nolonger will pay any tax on interest, dividends, or capital gains; no tax on your savings. 
That makes life a lot easier.  If you’re getting interest from a bank, if you’re getting astatement from a mutual fund, or any other kind of investments you have, you don't have toworry about filing taxes on that because there will be no taxes for anybody making $200,000a year and less on your interest, dividends and capital gains.
Why am I lowering taxes on the middle class?  Because under the last four years, they’vebeen buried, and I want to help people in the middle class.  And I will not -- I will not underany circumstances reduce the share that's being paid by the highest income taxpayers.  And Iwill not under any circumstances increase taxes on the middle class. 
The President’s spending, the President’s borrowing will cause this nation to have to raisetaxes on the American people, not just at the high end.  A recent study has shown that peoplein the middle class will see $4,000 a year higher taxes as a result of the spending andborrowing of this administration.  I will not let that happen.  I’ll get us on track to a balancedbudget, and I’m going to reduce the tax burden on middle-income families.  And what’s thatgoing to do?  It’s going to help those families, and it’s going to create incentives to startgrowing jobs again in this country.
Ms. Crowley:  Thanks, Governor.
President Obama:  My philosophy on taxes has been simple, and that is I want to givemiddle-class families and folks who are striving to get into the middle class some relief --because they have been hit hard, over the last decade, over the last 15, over the last 20years.
Property of 
  
So four years ago, I stood on a stage just like this one -- actually, it was a town hall -- and Isaid, I would cut taxes for middle-class families, and that's what I've done -- by $3,600.  Isaid I would cut taxes for small businesses -- who are the drivers and engines of growth --and we've cut them 18 times.  And I want to continue those tax cuts for middle-class familiesand for small businesses.
But what I've also said is if we're serious about reducing the deficit, if this is genuinely a moralobligation to the next generation, then in addition to some tough spending cuts, we've alsogot to make sure that the wealthy do a little bit more. 
So what I've said is your first $250,000 worth of income, no change. And that means 98percent of American families, 97 percent of small businesses, they will not see a tax increase. I'm ready to sign that bill right now.  The only reason it's not happening is because GovernorRomney's allies in Congress have held the 98 percent hostage, because they want tax breaksfor the top 2 percent.  
But what I've also said is for above $250,000, we can go back to the tax rates we had whenBill Clinton was President.  We created 23 million new jobs.  That's part of what took us fromdeficits to surplus.  It will be good for our economy and it will be good for job creation. 
Now, Governor Romney has a different philosophy.  He was on "60 Minutes" just two weeksago and he was asked, is it fair for somebody like you making $20 million a year to pay alower tax rate than a nurse or bus driver, somebody making $50,000 a year. And he said,yes, I think that's fair.  Not only that, he said, I think that's what grows the economy. 
Well, I fundamentally disagree with that.  I think what grows the economy is when you getthat tax credit that we put in place for your kids going to college.  I think that grows theeconomy.  I think what grows the economy is when we make sure small businesses aregetting a tax credit for hiring veterans who fought for our country.  That grows our economy.
So we just have a different theory.  And when Governor Romney stands here, after a year ofcampaigning when during a Republican primary, he stood on stage and said, I'm going to givetax cuts -- he didn't say tax rate cuts, he said tax cuts -- to everybody including the top 1percent, you should believe him, because that's been his history.  And that's exactly the kindof top-down economics that is not going to work if we want a strong middle class and aneconomy that's thriving for everybody. 
Ms. Crowley:  Governor Romney, I'm sure you've got a reply there.
Governor Romney:  You're absolutely right.  You heard what I said about my tax plan.  Thetop 5 percent will continue to pay 60 percent, as they do today.  I'm not looking to cut taxesfor wealthy people.  I am looking to cut taxes for middle-income people. 
Property of 
  
And why do I want to bring rates down and at the same time lower exemptions anddeductions, particularly for people at the high end?  Because if you bring rates down, it makesit easier for small business to keep more of their capital and hire people. And for me, this isabout jobs.  I want to get America's economy going again.  Fifty-four percent of America'sworkers work in businesses that are taxed as individuals.  So when you bring those ratesdown, those small businesses are able to keep more money and hire more people.
For me, I look at what's happened in the last four years and say this has been adisappointment.  We can do better than this. We don't have to settle for how many months --43 months with unemployment above 8 percent, 23 million Americans struggling to find agood job right now.  There are 3.5 million more women living in poverty today than when thePresident took office.  We don’t have to live like this. 
We can get this economy going again.  My five-point plan does it.  Energy independence forNorth America in five years; opening up more trade, particularly in Latin America; crackingdown on China when they cheat; getting us to a balanced budget; fixing our trainingprograms for our workers; and, finally, championing small business. 
I want to help small businesses grow and thrive.  I know how to make that happen.  I spentmy life in the private sector.  I know why jobs come and why they go.  And they're going nowbecause of the policies of this administration.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor, let me ask the President something about what you just said.  TheGovernor says that he is not going to allow the top 5 percent -- I believe is what he said -- tohave a tax cut, that it will all even out, that what he wants to do is give that tax cut to themiddle class.  Settled?
President Obama:  No, it's not settled.  Look, the cost of lowering rates for everybody acrossthe board 20 percent, along with what he also wants to do in terms of eliminating the estatetax, along with what he wants to do in terms of corporate changes in the tax code, it costsabout $5 trillion. 
Governor Romney then also wants to spend $2 trillion on additional military programs, eventhough the military is not asking for them.  That's $7 trillion.  He also wants to continue theBush tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans.  That's another trillion dollars.  That's $8 trillion. 
Now, what he says is he's going to make sure that this doesn't add to the deficit and he'sgoing to cut middle-class taxes.  But when he's asked how are you going to do it, whichdeductions, which loopholes are you going to close, he can't tell you.  The fact that he onlyhas to pay 14 percent on his taxes when a lot of you are paying much higher, he's alreadytaken that off the board.  Capital gains are going to continue to be at a low rate, so we're notgoing to get money that way. 
Property of 
  
We haven't heard from the Governor any specifics beyond Big Bird and eliminating funding forPlanned Parenthood in terms of how he pays for that.
Now, Governor Romney was a very successful investor.  If somebody came to you, Governor,with a plan that said, here, I want to spend $7 or $8 trillion and then we’re going to pay for it,but we can’t tell you until maybe after the election how we’re going to do it, you wouldn’thave taken such a sketchy deal. 
And neither should you, the American people, because the math doesn’t add up.  And what’sat stake here is one of two things.  Either, Candy, this blows up the deficit -- because keep inmind, this is just to pay for the additional spending that he’s talking about -- $7-$8 trillion --that’s before we even get to the deficit we already have.
Or, alternatively, it’s got to be paid for not only by closing deductions for wealthy individuals -
- that will pay for about 4 percent reduction in tax rates -- you’re going to be paying for it. You’ll lose some deductions.  And you can’t buy this sales pitch.  Nobody who’s looked at itthat’s serious actually believes it adds up.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, let me get the Governor in on this.  And, Governor, let’s, beforewe get into a vast array of who says -- what study says what, if it shouldn’t add up, ifsomehow when you get in there, there isn’t enough tax revenue coming in, if somehow thenumbers don’t add up, would you be willing to look again at a 20 percent --
Governor Romney:  Well, of course they add up.  I was someone who ran businesses for 25years and balanced the budget.  I ran the Olympics and balanced the budget.  I ran the stateof a Massachusetts as a governor, to the extent any governor does, and balanced the budgetall four years. When we’re talking about math that doesn’t add up, how about $4 trillion ofdeficits over the last four years -- $5 trillion? That’s math that doesn’t add up.  We have aPresident talking about someone’s plan in a way that’s completely foreign to what my realplan is. 
And then we have his own record, which is we have four consecutive years where he said,when he was running for office, he would cut the deficit in half.  Instead, he’s doubled it. We’ve gone from $10 trillion of national debt to $16 trillion of national debt.  If the Presidentwere reelected, we’d go to almost $20 trillion of national debt.  This puts us on a road toGreece.
I know what it takes to balance budgets.  I’ve done it my entire life.  So for instance, when hesays, yours is a $5 trillion cut -- well, no, it’s not, because I’m offsetting some of thereductions, withholding down some of the deductions and I --
President Obama:  Candy --
Ms. Crowley:  Governor, I’ve got to --
Property of 
  
Governor Romney:  I’m sorry --
Ms. Crowley:  Actually, I need to have you both hang -- I understand the stakes here.  Iunderstand both of you, but I will get run out of town if I don’t allow --
Governor Romney:  And I just described to you, Mr. President, I just described to youprecisely how I’d do it --
Ms. Crowley:   You will get --
Governor Romney:  -- which is with a single number that people can put -- and they can puttheir deductions and credits into that bucket.
President Obama:  Are we keeping track of --
Ms. Crowley:  Let me -- Mr. President, we’re keeping track, I promise you.  And, Mr.President, the next question is for you --
President Obama:  Great, looking forward to it.
Ms. Crowley:  -- so stay standing.  And it’s Catherine Fenton who has a question for you.
Q:  In what new ways do you intend to rectify the inequalities in the workplace, specificallyregarding females making only 72 percent of what their male counterparts earn?
President Obama:  Well, Catherine, this is a great question.  And I was raised by a singlemom who had to put herself through school while looking after two kids.  And she workedhard every day and made a lot of sacrifices to make sure we got everything we needed.
My grandmother, she started off as a secretary in a bank.  She never got a college educationeven though she was smart as a whip.  And she worked her way up to become a vicepresident at a local bank, but she hit the glass ceiling.  She trained people who would end upbecoming her bosses during the course of her career.  She didn't complain.  That's not whatyou did in that generation. 
And this is one of the reasons why one of the first -- the first bill I signed was somethingcalled the Lilly Ledbetter bill, and it was named after this amazing woman who had been doingthe same job as a man for years, found out that she was getting paid less, and the SupremeCourt said that she couldn’t bring suit because she should have found out about it earlier,where she had no way of finding out about it.  So we fixed that. And that's an example of the kind of advocacy that we need, because women are increasinglythe breadwinners in the family.  This is not just a women’s issue.  This is a family issue; this isa middle-class issue.  And that's why we’ve got to fight for it. 
Property of 
  
It also means that we’ve got to make sure that young people like yourself are able to afford acollege education.  Earlier, Governor Romney talked about he wants to make Pell grants andother education accessible for young people.  Well, the truth of the matter is, is that that'sexactly what we’ve done.  We’ve expanded Pell grants for millions of people, including millionsof young women all across the country.  We did it by taking $60 billion that was going tobanks and lenders as middlemen for the student loan program, and we said let’s just cut outthe middle man.  Let’s give the money directly to students.  And as a consequence, we’veseen millions of young people be able to afford college, and that's going to make sure thatyoung women are going to be able to compete in that marketplace. 
But we’ve got to enforce the laws, which is what we are doing.  And we’ve also got to makesure that in every walk of life, we do not tolerate discrimination.  That's been one of thehallmarks of my administration.  I’m going to continue to push on this issue for the next fouryears.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor Romney, pay equity for women.
Governor Romney:  Thank you, an important topic, and one which I learned a great dealabout, particularly as I was serving as governor of my state, because I had the chance to pulltogether a cabinet, and all the applicants seemed to be men.  And I went to my staff and Isaid, how come all the people for these jobs are all men?  They said, well, these are thepeople that have the qualifications.  And I said, well, gosh, can’t we find some women that arealso qualified?  And so we took a concerted effort to go out and find women who hadbackgrounds that could be qualified to become members of our cabinet.  I went to a numberof women’s groups and said, can you help us find folks?  And they brought us whole bindersfull of women.
I was proud of the fact that after I staffed my cabinet and my senior staff, that the Universityof New York in Albany did a survey of all 50 states and concluded that mine had more womenin senior leadership positions than any other state in America. 
Now, one of the reasons I was able to get so many good women to be part of that team wasbecause of our recruiting effort, but number two, because I recognize that if you’re going tohave women in the workforce that sometimes they need to be more flexible.  My chief of staff,for instance, had two kids that were still in school.  She said, I can’t be here until 7:00 p.m. or8:00 p.m. at night; I need to be able to get home at 5:00 p.m. so I can be there for makingdinner for my kids and being with them when they get home from school.  So we said, fine,let’s have a flexible schedule so you can have hours that work for you.
We’re going to have to have employers in the new economy, in the economy I’m going tobring to play, that are going to be so anxious to get good workers, they’re going to be anxiousto hire women.
Property of 
  
In the last four years, women have lost 580,000 jobs.  That's the net of what's happened inthe last four years.  We’re still down 580,000 jobs.  I mentioned 3.5 million women more nowin poverty than four years ago. 
What we can do to help young women and women of all ages is to have a strong economy, sostrong that employers are looking to find good employees and bringing them into theirworkforce, and adapting to a flexible work schedule that gives women the opportunities thatthey would otherwise not be able to afford.
This is what I’ve done.  It’s what I look forward to doing. And I know what it takes to make aneconomy work.  And I know what a working economy looks like.  And an economy with 7.8percent unemployment is not a real strong economy.  An economy that has 23 million peoplelooking for work is not a strong economy.  An economy with 50 percent of kids graduatingfrom college that can’t find a job, or a college-level job -- that's not what we have to have. I’m going to help women in America get good work by getting a stronger economy and bysupporting women in the workforce. 
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, why don't you get in on this quickly, please?
President Obama:  Catherine, I just want to point out that when Governor Romney’scampaign was asked about the Lilly Ledbetter bill, whether he supported it, he said, I’ll getback to you.  And that's not the kind of advocacy that women need in any economy. 
Now, there are some other issues that have a bearing on how women succeed in theworkplace -- for example, their health care. A major difference in this campaign is thatGovernor Romney feels comfortable having politicians in Washington decide the health carechoices that women are making.  I think that's a mistake. 
In my health care bill, I said insurance companies need to provide contraceptive coverage toeverybody who’s insured, because this is not just a health issue, it’s an economic issue forwomen.  It makes a difference.  This is money out of that family’s pocket. 
Governor Romney not only opposed it, he suggested that in fact employers should be able tomake the decision as to whether or not a woman gets contraception through her insurancecoverage. That's not the kind of advocacy that women need.
When Governor Romney says that we should eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood, thereare millions of women all across the country who rely on Planned Parenthood for not justcontraceptive care; they rely on it for mammograms, for cervical cancer screenings.  That's apocketbook issue for women and families all across the country, and it makes a difference interms of how well and effectively women are able to work. 
When we talk about child care and the credits that we’re providing, that makes a difference interms of whether they can go out there and earn a living for their family.
Property of 
  
These are not just women’s issues.  These are family issues. These are economic issues.  Andone of the things that makes us grow as an economy is when everybody participates, andwomen are getting the same, fair deal as men are.  And I’ve got two daughters and I want tomake sure that they have the same opportunities that anybody’s sons have.  And that's a partof what I’m fighting for as President of the United States.
Ms. Crowley:  I want to move us along here to Susan Katz [ph] who has a question.  And,Governor, it’s for you. 
Q:  Governor Romney, I am an undecided voter because I’m disappointed with the lack ofprogress I’ve seen in the last four years.  However, I do attribute much of America’s economicand international problems to the failings and missteps of the Bush administration.  Since bothyou and President Bush are Republicans, I fear a return to the policies of those years shouldyou win this election.  What is the biggest difference between you and George W. Bush? Andhow do you differentiate yourself from George W. Bush?
Governor Romney:  Thank you.  And I appreciate that question.  I just want to make surethat -- I think I was supposed to get that last answer, but I want to point out that I don'tbelieve --
President Obama:  I don't think so, Candy.  I want to make sure your timekeepers areworking here.
Governor Romney:  The time --
Ms. Crowley:  The timekeepers are all working. 
President Obama:  All right.
Ms. Crowley:  And let me tell you that the last part, it’s for the two of you to talk to oneanother, and it isn’t quite as ordered as you think.  But go ahead and use this two minutesany way you’d like to, the question is on the floor.
Governor Romney:  I’d just note that I don't believe that bureaucrats in Washington shouldtell someone whether they can use contraceptives or not, and I don't believe employersshould tell someone whether they could have contraceptive care or not.  Every woman inAmerica should have access to contraceptives.  And the President’s statement of my policy iscompletely and totally wrong.
President Obama:  Governor, that's not true.
Property of 
  
Governor Romney:  Let me come back and answer your question. President Bush and I aredifferent people, and these are different times.  And that's why my five-point plan is sodifferent than what he would have done. 
For instance, we can now by virtue of new technology actually get all the energy we need inNorth America without having to go to the Arabs or the Venezuelans or anyone else.  Thatwasn’t true in his time.  That's why my policy starts with a very robust policy to get all thatenergy in North America, become energy secure.
Number two, trade:  I’ll crack down on China.  President Bush didn't.  I’m also going todramatically expand trade in Latin America.  It’s been growing about 12 percent per year overa long period of time.  I want to add more free trade agreements so we’ll have more trade.
Number three, I’m going to get us to a balanced budget.  President Bush didn't.  PresidentObama was right -- he said that that was outrageous to have deficits as high as half a trilliondollars under the Bush years.  He was right.  But then he put in place deficits twice that sizefor every one of his four years, and his forecast for the next four years is more deficits almostthat large.  So that's the next way I’m different than President Bush.
And then let’s take the last one, championing small business.  Our party has been focused onbig business too long.  I came through small business.  I understand how hard it is to start asmall business.  That's why everything I’ll do is designed to help small businesses grow andadd jobs.  I want to keep their taxes down on small business.  I want regulators to see theirjob as encouraging small enterprise, not crushing it. 
And the thing I find most troubling about Obamacare -- well, it’s a long list -- but one of thethings I find most troubling is that when you go out and talk to small businesses and ask themwhat they think about it, they tell you it keeps them from hiring more people. 
My priority is jobs.  I know how to make that happen.  And President Bush had a verydifferent path for a very different time.  My path is designed in getting small businesses togrow and hire people.
Ms. Crowley:  Thanks, Governor. 
Mr. President.
President Obama:  Well, first of all, I think it’s important to tell you that we did come induring some tough times.  We were losing 800,000 jobs a month when I started.  But wehave been digging our way out of policies that were misplaced and focused on the top doingvery well and middle-class folks not doing well. And we’ve seen 30 consecutive -- 31consecutive months of job growth, 5.2 million new jobs created.  And the plans that I talkedabout will create even more.
Property of 
  
But when Governor Romney says that he has a very different economic plan, the centerpieceof his economic plan are tax cuts. That’s what took us from surplus to deficit.  When he talksabout getting tough on China, keep in mind that Governor Romney invested in companies thatwere pioneers of outsourcing to China, and is currently investing in countries -- in companiesthat are building surveillance equipment for China to spy on its own folks. 
Governor, you’re the last person who is going to get tough on China.
And what we’ve done when it comes to trade is not only sign three trade deals to open up newmarkets, but we’ve also set up a task force for trade that goes after anybody who is takingadvantage of American workers or businesses, and not creating a level playing field.  We’vebrought twice as many cases against unfair trading practices than the previous administrationand we’ve won every single one that’s been decided.
When I said that we had to make sure that China was not flooding our domestic market withcheap tires, Governor Romney said I was being protectionist, that it wouldn’t be helpful toAmerican workers.  Well, in fact, we saved a thousand jobs.  And that’s the kind of toughtrade actions that are required. 
But the last point I want to make is this:  There are some things where Governor Romney isdifferent from George Bush.  George Bush didn’t propose turning Medicare into a voucher. George Bush embraced comprehensive immigration reform; he didn’t call for self-deportation. George Bush never suggested that we eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood. 
So there are differences between Governor Romney and George Bush, but they’re not oneconomic policy.  In some ways, he’s gone to a more extreme place when it comes to socialpolicy.  And I think that’s a mistake.  That’s not how we’re going to move our economyforward.
Ms. Crowley:  I want to move you both along to the next question because it’s in the samewheelhouse so you will be able to respond.  But the President does get this question.  I wantto call on Michael Jones.
Q:  Mr. President, I voted for you in 2008.  What have you done or accomplished to earn myvote in 2012?  I’m not that optimistic as I was in 2012.  Most things I need for everyday livingare very expensive.
President Obama:  Well, we’ve gone through a tough four years, there’s no doubt about it. But four years ago, I told the American people and I told you I would cut taxes for middle-
class families, and I did.  I told you I’d cut taxes for small businesses, and I have.  I said thatI’d end the war in Iraq, and I did.  I said we’d refocus attention on those who actuallyattacked us on 9/11, and we have gone after al Qaeda’s leadership like never before andOsama bin Laden is dead. 
Property of 
  
I said that we would put in place health care reform to make sure that insurance companiescan't jerk you around, and if you don't have health insurance, that you'd have a chance to getaffordable insurance -- and I have. I committed that I would rein in the excesses of WallStreet, and we passed the toughest Wall Street reforms since the 1930s. We've created 5million jobs -- gone from 800,000 jobs a month being lost -- and we are making progress. We saved an auto industry that was on the brink of collapse.
Now, does that mean you're not struggling?  Absolutely not. A lot of us are.  And that's whythe plan that I've put forward for manufacturing, and education, and reducing our deficit in asensible way, using the savings from ending wars to rebuild America and putting people backto work, making sure that we are controlling our own energy, but not just the energy oftoday, but also the energy of the future -- all those things will make a difference.
So the point is the commitments I've made I've kept.  And those that I haven't been able tokeep, it's not for lack of trying and we're going to get it done in a second term.  But youshould pay attention to this campaign, because Governor Romney has made somecommitments as well, and I suspect he'll keep those, too.  When members of the RepublicanCongress say, we're going to sign a no-tax pledge so that we don’t ask a dime frommillionaires and billionaires to reduce our deficit so we can still invest in education and helpingkids go to college, he said, me, too. 
When they said, we're going to cut Planned Parenthood funding, he said, me, too.  When theysaid, we're going to repeal Obamacare -- the first thing I'm going to do, despite the fact thatit's the same health care plan that he passed in Massachusetts and is working well -- he said,me too. That is not the kind of leadership that you need, but you should expect that those arepromises he's going to keep. 
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, let me let --
President Obama:  And the choice in this election is going to be whose promises are goingto be more likely to help you in your life, make sure your kids can go to college, make surethat you are getting a good-paying job, making sure that Medicare and Social Security will bethere for you.
Ms. Crowley:  Thank you. 
Governor.
Governor Romney:  I think you know better.  I think you know that these last four yearshaven't been so good as the President just described, and that you don't feel like you'reconfident that the next four years are going to be much better either.  I can tell you that ifyou were to elect President Obama, you know what you're going to get.  You're going to get arepeat of the last four years.  We just can't afford four more years like the last four years. 
Property of 
  
He said that by now we'd have unemployment at 5.4 percent.  The difference between whereit is and 5.4 percent is 9 million Americans without work.  I wasn't the one that said 5.4percent. This was the President's plan -- didn't get there. 
He said he would have by now put forward a plan to reform Medicare and Social Security,because he pointed out they're on the road to bankruptcy.  He would reform them.  He'd getthat done.  He hasn't even made a proposal on either one.  He said in his first year he’d putout an immigration plan that would deal with our immigration challenges -- didn't even file it.  
This is a President who has not been able to do what he said he’d do.  He said that he’d cut inhalf the deficit -- he hasn’t done that either; in fact, he doubled it.  He said that by now,middle-income families would have a reduction in their health insurance premiums by $2,500a year.  It’s gone up by $2,500 a year.  And if Obamacare is passed -- or implemented -- it’salready been passed -- if it’s implemented fully, it will be another $2,500 on top. 
The middle class is getting crushed under the policies of a President who has not understoodwhat it takes to get the economy working again.  He keeps saying, look, I’ve created 5 millionjobs.  That’s after losing 5 million jobs.  The entire record is such that the unemployment hasnot been reduced in this country. The unemployment, the number of people who are stilllooking for work, is still 23 million Americans.  There are more people in poverty -- one out ofsix people in poverty. 
How about food stamps?  When he took office, 32 million people were on food stamps. Today, 47 million people are on food stamps.  How about the growth of the economy?  It’sgrowing more slowly this year than last year, and more slowly last year than the year before.
The President wants to do well, I understand.  But the policies he’s put in place, fromObamacare to Dodd-Frank to his tax policies to his regulatory policies -- these policiescombined have not let this economy take off and grow like it could have.  You might say, well,you got an example of when it worked better?  Yes.  In the Reagan recession, whereunemployment hit 10.8 percent, between that period -- the end of that recession and theequivalent period of time to today, Ronald Reagan’s recovery created twice as many jobs asthis President’s recovery. 
Five million jobs doesn’t even keep up with our population growth.  And the only reason theunemployment rate seems a little lower today is because of all the people that have droppedout of the workforce.  The President has tried, but his policies haven’t worked.  He’s great as aspeaker and describing his plans and his vision. That’s wonderful, except we have a record tolook at.  And that record shows he just hasn’t been able to cut the deficit, to put in placereforms for Medicare and Social Security to preserve them, to get us the rising incomes weneed.  Median incomes down $4,300 a family, and 23 million Americans out of work -- that’swhat this election is about.  It’s about who can get the middle class in this country a brightand prosperous future and assure our kids the kind of hope and optimism they deserve.
Property of 
  
Ms. Crowley:  Governor, I want to move you along.  Don’t go away, and we’ll have plenty oftime to respond.  We are quite aware of the clock for both of you.  But I want to bring in adifferent subject here.  Mr. President, I’ll be right back with you.  Lorraine Osario [ph] has aquestion for you about a topic we have not heard.
President Obama:  This is for Governor Romney?
Ms. Crowley:  Yes, this is for Governor Romney, and we’ll be right with you, Mr. President. Thanks.
Governor Romney:  Is it Lorena?
Q:  Lorraine.
Governor Romney:  Lorraine?
Q:  Yes, Lorraine.  How are you doing?
Governor Romney:  Good, thanks.
Q:  President.  Romney:  What do you plan on doing with immigrants without their green cardthat are currently living here as productive members of society?
Governor Romney:  Thank you, Lorraine.  Did I get that right?  Good.  Thank you forquestion.  And let me step back and tell you what I’d like to do with our immigration policybroadly, and include an answer to your question. 
First of all, this is a nation of immigrants.  We welcome people coming to this country asimmigrants.  My dad was born in Mexico of American parents; Ann’s dad was born in Walesand is a first-generation American.  We welcome legal immigrants into this country.
I want our legal system to work better.  I want it to be streamlined.  I want it to be clearer.  Idon’t think you have to -- shouldn’t have to hire a lawyer to figure out how to get into thiscountry legally.  I also think that we should give visas to people -- green cards, rather, topeople who graduate with skills that we need.  People around the world with accrediteddegrees in science and math get a green card stapled to their diploma; come to the U.S. of A. We should make sure that our legal system works.  
Number two, we’re going to have to stop illegal immigration. There are 4 million people whoare waiting in line to get here legally.  Those who’ve come here illegally take their place.  So Iwill not grant amnesty to those who’ve come here illegally.  What I will do is I’ll put in placean employment verification system and make sure that employers that hire people who havecome here illegally are sanctioned for doing so.
Property of 
  
I won’t put in place magnets for people coming here illegally.  So, for instance, I would notgive driver’s licenses to those that have come here illegally, as the President would. The kidsof those that came here illegally -- those kids I think should have a pathway to become apermanent resident of the United States.  And military service, for instance, is one way theywould have that kind of pathway to become a permanent resident.
Now, when the President ran for office he said that he’d put in place in his first year a piece oflegislation -- he’d file a bill in his first year that would reform our immigration system  --protect legal immigration, stop illegal immigration.  He didn’t do it.  He had a DemocratHouse, a Democrat Senate, a supermajority in both houses.  Why did he fail to even promotelegislation that would have provided an answer for those that want to come here legally andfor those that are here illegally today?  That’s a question I think the President will have achance to answer to answer right now.
President Obama:  Good, I look forward to it.  Was it Lorena? Lorraine.  We are a nation ofimmigrants.  We’re just a few miles away from Ellis Island.  We all understand what thiscountry has become because talent from all around the world wants to come here.  People arewilling to take risks.  People who want to build on their dreams and make sure their kids haveeven bigger dreams than they have.
But we’re also a nation of laws.  So what I’ve said is we need to fix a broken immigrationsystem.  And I’ve done everything I can on my own, and sought cooperation from Congress tomake sure that we fixed the system. 
First thing we did was to streamline the legal immigration system to reduce the backlog, makeit easier, simpler and cheaper for people who are waiting in line, obeying the law, to makesure that they can come here and contribute to our country.  And that's good for our economicgrowth.  They’ll start new businesses.  They’ll make things happen that create jobs here in theUnited States. 
Number two, we do have to deal with our border, so we put more Border Patrol on than anytime in history, and the flow of undocumented workers across the border is actually lowerthan it’s been in 40 years.
What I’ve also said is if we’re going to go after folks who are here illegally, we should do itsmartly and go after folks who are criminals, gangbangers, people who are hurting thecommunity -- not after students.  Not after folks who are here just because they're trying tofigure out how to feed their families.  And that's what we’ve done. 
And what I’ve also said is for young people who come here, brought here oftentimes by theirparents, have gone to school here, pledged allegiance to the flag, think of this as theircountry, understand themselves as Americans in every way except having papers, then weshould make sure that we give them a pathway to citizenship.  And that's what I’ve doneadministratively.
Property of 
  
Now, Governor Romney just said that he wants to help those young people, too.  But duringthe Republican primary he said, I will veto the DREAM Act that would allow these youngpeople to have access.  His main strategy during the Republican primary was to say, we’regoing to encourage self-deportation -- making life so miserable on folks that they’ll leave. 
He called the Arizona law a model for the nation -- part of the Arizona law said that lawenforcement officers could stop folks because they suspected maybe they looked like theymight be undocumented workers and check their papers.  And you know what, if my daughteror yours looks to somebody like they're not a citizen, I don't want to empower somebody likethat. 
So we can fix this system in a comprehensive way.  And when Governor Romney says thechallenge is, well, Obama didn't try -- that's not true.  I sat down with Democrats andRepublicans at the beginning of my term, and I said, let’s fix this system, including senatorspreviously who had supported it on the Republican side.  But it’s very hard for Republicans inCongress to support comprehensive immigration reform if their standard bearer has said that,this is not something I’m interested in supporting.
Ms. Crowley:  Let me get the Governor in here, Mr. President.  Let’s speak to, if you could,Governor --
Governor Romney:  Let’s.
Ms. Crowley:  -- the idea of self-deportation.
Governor Romney:  No, let me go back and speak to the points that the President made andlet’s get them correct.  I did not say that the Arizona law was a model for the nation in thataspect.  I said that the E-Verify portion of the Arizona law, which is -- which is the portion ofthe law which says that employers could be able to determine whether someone is hereillegally or not illegally, that that was a model for the nation. That's number one.
Number two, I asked the President a question I think Hispanics and immigrants all over thenation have asked.  He was asked this on Univision the other day.  Why, when you said you’dfile legislation in your first year, didn’t you do it?  And he didn’t answer.  He doesn’t answerthat question.  He said the standard bearer wasn’t for it.  I’m glad you thought I was astandard bearer four years ago, but I wasn't.  Four years ago, you said in your first year, youwould file legislation.  In his first year, I was just getting -- licking my wounds from havingbeen beaten by John McCain, all right.  I was not the standard bearer.  My view is that thisPresident should have honored his promise to do as he said.
Now, let me mention one other thing and that is self-deportation says let people make theirown choice.  What I was saying is we’re not going to round up 12 million people,undocumented, illegals, and take them out of the nation.  Instead, let people make their ownchoice.
Property of 
  
And if they find that they can’t get the benefits here that they want and they can’t find the jobthey want, then they’ll make a decision to go a place where they have better opportunities.But I’m not in favor of rounding up people and taking them out of this country.  I am in favor,as the President has said and I agree with him, which is that if people have committed crimeswe’ve got to get them out of this country.
Let me mention something else the President said.  It was a moment ago and I didn’t get achance to -- when he was describing Chinese investments and so forth --
President Obama:  Candy, hold on a second.  At some point --
Governor Romney:  Mr. President, I’m still speaking.
Ms. Crowley:  I’m sorry --
Governor Romney:  Mr. President, why don't you let me finish --
President Obama::  Governor Romney, I’m used to --
Governor Romney:  I’m going -- I’m going to continue -- I’m going to continue.  If thePresident made --
Ms. Crowley:  Go ahead and finish, Governor Romney.  Governor Romney, if you could makeit short.  See all these people, they’ve been waiting for you.  Could you make it short and then--
Governor Romney:  Yes, just going to make a point.  Any investments I have over the lasteight years have been managed by a blind trust.  And I understand they do includeinvestments outside the United States, including in Chinese companies. Mr. President, haveyou looked at your pension?
President Obama:  Candy --
Governor Romney:  Have you looked at your pension?
President Obama:  I’ve got to say -- Candy --
Governor Romney:  Mr. President, have you looked at your pension?
President Obama:  You know, I don’t look at my pension.  It’s not as big as yours so itdoesn’t take as long.
Governor Romney:  Let me give you some advice.
Property of 
  
President Obama:  I don’t check it that often.
Governor Romney:  Look at your pension.  You also have investments in Chinesecompanies.  You also have investments outside the United States.  You also have investmentsthrough a Cayman’s trust.
Ms. Crowley:  We are sort of way off topic here, Governor Romney.
President Obama:  We’re a little off topic here.
Ms. Crowley:  We are completely off immigration.
President Obama:  I know we were talking about immigration.
Ms. Crowley:  And we’ve -- quickly, Mr. President --
President Obama:  I do want to make sure --
Ms. Crowley:  If I could have you sit down, Governor Romney.  Thank you.
President Obama:  I do want to make sure that we just understand something.  GovernorRomney says he wasn’t referring to Arizona as a model for the nation.  His top advisor onimmigration is the guy who designed the Arizona law, the entirety of it.  Not E-Verify, thewhole thing.  That’s his policy.  And it’s a bad policy.  And it won’t help us grow.
Look, when we think about immigration, we have to understand there are folks all around theworld who still see America as the land of promise.  And they provide us energy and theyprovide us innovation, and they start companies like Intel and Google -- and we want toencourage that.
Now, we’ve got to make sure that we do it in a smart way, in a comprehensive way, and wemake the legal system better.  But when we make this into a divisive political issue, and whenwe don’t have bipartisan support -- I can deliver, Governor, a whole bunch of Democrats toget comprehensive immigration reform done, and we can’t --
Governor Romney:  I’ll get it done.  I’ll get it done the first year --
President Obama:  -- we have not seen Republicans serious about this issue at all.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, let me move you on here, please.  Mr. President --
President Obama:  And it’s time for them to get serious on this. 
Property of 
  
Ms. Crowley:  Don’t go away, though. 
President Obama:  This used to be a bipartisan issue.
Ms. Crowley:  Right.  Don’t go away, because --
President Obama:  I’m here.
Ms. Crowley:  -- I want you to talk to Carey Ladka [ph], who wants to switch the topic forus.
President Obama:  Okay.  Hi, Carey.
Q:  Good evening, Mr. President.
President Obama:  I’m sorry, what’s your name?
Q:  It’s Carey.  Carey Ladka [ph].
President Obama:  Great to see you, Carey.
Q:  This question actually comes from a brain trust of my friends at Global Telecom Supply inMineola yesterday.  We were sitting around talking about Libya, and we were reading andbecame aware of reports that the State Department refused extra security for our embassy inBenghazi, Libya, prior to the attacks that killed four Americans.  Who was it that deniedenhanced security, and why?
President Obama:  Well, let me, first of all, talk about our diplomats, because they serve allaround the world and do an incredible job in a very dangerous situation.  And these aren’t justrepresentatives of the United States.  They’re my representatives.  I send them there,oftentimes into harm’s way. I know these folks, and I know these families.  So nobody is moreconcerned about their safety and security than I am.
So as soon as we found out that the Benghazi consulate was being overrun, I was on thephone with my national security team, and I gave them three instructions.  Number one, beefup our security and procedures not just in Libya but in every embassy and consulate in theregion.  Number two, investigate exactly what happened, regardless of where the facts leadus, to make sure that folks are held accountable and it doesn’t happen again. And numberthree, we are going to find out who did this and we are going to hunt them down, becauseone of the things that I’ve said throughout my presidency is when folks mess with Americans,we go after them.
Property of 
  
Now, Governor Romney had a very different response.  While we were still dealing with ourdiplomats being threatened, Governor Romney put out a press release, trying to makepolitical points.  And that's not how a Commander-in-Chief operates.  You don't turn nationalsecurity into a political issue, certainly not right when it’s happening. 
And people -- not everybody agrees with some of the decisions I’ve made, but when it comesto our national security, I mean what I say.  I said I’d end the war in Libya -- in Iraq, and Idid.  I said that we’d go after al Qaeda and bin Laden -- we have.  I said we’d transition out ofAfghanistan and start making sure that Afghans are responsible for their own security. That'swhat I’m doing.
And when it comes to this issue, when I say that we are going to find out exactly whathappened, everybody will be held accountable -- and I am ultimately responsible for what’staking place there, because these are my folks, and I’m the one who has to greet those coffinswhen they come home, you know that I mean what I say.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, I’ve got to move us along. 
Governor?
Governor Romney:  Thank you, Carey, for your question.  It’s an important one, and I thinkthe President just said correctly that the buck does stop at his desk, and he takesresponsibility for that -- for the failure in providing those security resources.  And thoseterrible things may well happen from time to time.  I feel very deeply sympathetic for thefamilies of those who lost loved ones.  And today there’s a memorial service for one of thosethat was lost in this tragedy.  We think of their families and care for them deeply.
There were other issues associated with this tragedy.  There were many days that passedbefore we knew whether this was a spontaneous demonstration or actually whether it was aterrorist attack.  And there was no demonstration involved.  It was a terrorist attack.  And ittook a long time for that to be told to the American people. 
Whether there was some misleading or instead whether we just didn’t know what happened, Ithink you have to ask yourself, why didn’t we know five days later when the Ambassador tothe United Nations went on TV to say that this was a demonstration -- how could we have notknown? 
But I find more troubling than this that on the day following the assassination of the UnitedStates ambassador -- the first time that's happened since 1979 -- when we have fourAmericans killed there, when apparently we didn’t know what happened, that the President,the day after that happened, flies to Las Vegas for a political fundraiser, then the next day toColorado for another event, another political event.
Property of 
  
I think these actions taken by a President and a leader have symbolic significance, andperhaps even material significance in that you’d hope that during that time we could call inthe people who were actually eyewitnesses.  We’ve read their accounts now about whathappened.  It was very clear this was not a demonstration.  This was an attack by terrorists. 
And this calls into question the President’s whole policy in the Middle East.  Look what'shappening in Syria, in Egypt, now in Libya.  Consider the distance between ourselves andIsrael.  The President said that he was going to put daylight between us and Israel.  We haveIran four years closer to a nuclear bomb. 
Syria -- Syria is not just the tragedy of 30,000 civilians being killed by a military, but also astrategically significant player for America.  The President’s policies throughout the MiddleEast began with an apology tour, and pursue a strategy of leading from behind.  And thisstrategy is unraveling before our very eyes.
Ms. Crowley:  Because we’re closing in, I want to still get a lot of people in.  I want to askyou something, Mr. President, and then have the Governor just quickly.  Your Secretary ofState, as I’m sure you know, has said that she takes full responsibility for the attack on thediplomatic mission in Benghazi.  Does the buck stop with your Secretary of State, as far aswhat went on here?
President Obama:  Secretary Clinton has done an extraordinary job, but she works for me. I’m the President, and I’m always responsible.  And that’s why nobody is more interested infinding out exactly what happened than I do. 
The day after the attack, Governor, I stood in the Rose Garden and I told the American peopleand the world that we are going to find out exactly what happened, that this was an act ofterror, and I also said that we’re going to hunt down those who committed this crime.  Andthen a few days later, I was there greeting the caskets coming into Andrews Air Force Base,and grieving with the families. 
And the suggestion that anybody on my team -- whether the Secretary of State, our U.N.Ambassador -- anybody on my team would play politics or mislead when we’ve lost four of ourown, Governor, is offensive.  That’s not what we do.  That’s not what I do as President.  That’snot what I do as Commander-in-Chief.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor, if you want to reply quickly to this please.
Governor Romney:  Yes, I surely do.  I think it’s interesting the President just saidsomething, which is that on the day after the attack he went in the Rose Garden and said thatthis was an attack of terror.
President Obama:  That’s what I said.
Property of 
  
Governor Romney:  You said in the Rose Garden the day after the attack it was an act ofterror?  It was not a spontaneous demonstration?
President Obama:  Please proceed.
Governor Romney:  Is that what you’re saying?
President Obama:  Please proceed, Governor.
Governor Romney:  I want to make sure we get that for the record, because it took thePresident 14 days before he called the attack in Benghazi an act of terror. 
President Obama:  Get the transcript.
Ms. Crowley:  He did, in fact, sir.  So let me call it an act of terror in the Rose Garden.  Heused the word --
President Obama:  Can you say that a little louder, Candy?
Ms. Crowley:  He did call it an act of terror.  It did, as well, take -- it did, as well, take twoweeks or so for the whole idea of there being a riot out there about this tape to come out. Youare correct about that.
Governor Romney:  The administration indicated that this was a reaction to a video and wasa spontaneous reaction.
Ms. Crowley:  They did.
Governor Romney:  It took them a long time to say this was a terrorist act by a terroristgroup.  And to suggest -- am I incorrect in that regard? On Sunday, your Secretary --
President Obama:  Candy?
Governor Romney:  -- excuse me, the Ambassador to the United Nations went on theSunday television shows and spoke about how this was a spontaneous reaction.
President Obama:  Candy, I’m happy to have a longer conversation about foreign policy.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, let me -- I know you -- absolutely.  But I want to move you on.
President Obama:  Okay, I’m happy to do that, too.
Property of 
  
Ms. Crowley:  And also, people can go to the transcripts and --
President Obama:  I just want to make sure that --
Ms. Crowley:  -- figure out what was said and when.
President Obama:  -- all those wonderful folks are going to have a chance to get some oftheir questions answered.
Ms. Crowley:  Because what I want to do, Mr. President -- stand there for a second, becauseI want to introduce you to Nina Gonzalez, who brought up a question that we hear a lot bothover the Internet and from this crowd.
Q:  President Obama, during the Democratic National Convention in 2008, you stated youwanted to keep AK-47s out of the hands of criminals.  What has your administration done orplan to do to limit the availability of assault weapons?
President Obama:  We’re a nation that believes in the Second Amendment, and I believe inthe Second Amendment.  We’ve got a long tradition of hunting and sportsmen, and peoplewho want to make sure they can protect themselves. 
But there have been too many instances during the course of my presidency where I’ve had tocomfort families who have lost somebody -- most recently, out in Aurora.  Just a couple ofweeks ago -- actually probably about a month, I saw a mother who I had met at the bedsideof her son who had been shot in that theater. And her son had been shot through the head. And we spent some time and we said a prayer.  And remarkably, about two months later, thisyoung man and his mom showed up, and he looked unbelievable -- good as new.  But therewere a lot of families who didn’t have that good fortune, and whose sons or daughters orhusbands didn’t survive. 
So my belief is that, A, we have to enforce the laws we’ve already got; make sure that we’rekeeping guns out of the hands of criminals, those who are mentally ill.  We’ve done a muchbetter job in terms of background checks, but we’ve got more to do when it comes toenforcement. 
But I also share your belief that weapons that were designed for soldiers in war theaters don’tbelong on our streets.  And so what I’m trying to do is to get a broader conversation abouthow do we reduce the violence generally.  Part of it is seeing if we can get an assault weaponsban reintroduced, but part of it is also looking at other sources of the violence -- because,frankly, in my hometown of Chicago there’s an awful lot of violence, and they’re not using AK-
47s, they’re using cheap handguns. 
Property of 
  
And so what can we do to intervene, to make sure that young people have opportunity?  Thatour schools are working?  That if there’s violence on the streets, that working with faithgroups and law enforcement, we can catch it before it gets out of  control. 
And so what I want is a comprehensive strategy.  Part of it is seeing if we can get automaticweapons that kill folks in amazing numbers out of the hands of criminals and the mentally ill. But part of it is also going deeper and seeing if we can get into these communities and makingsure we catch violent impulses before they occur.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor Romney, the question is about assault weapons, AK-47s.
Governor Romney:  Yes, I’m not in favor of new pieces of legislation on guns and takingguns away or making certain guns illegal.  We, of course, don't want to have automaticweapons, and that's already illegal in this country to have automatic weapons. 
What I believe is we have to do, as the President mentioned towards the end of his remarksthere, which is to make enormous efforts to enforce the gun laws that we have and to changethe culture of violence we have.  And you ask how are we going to do that?  And there are anumber of things.  He mentioned good schools.  I totally agree.  We were able to drive ourschools to be number one in the nation in my state, and I believe if we do a better job ineducation, we’ll give people the hope and opportunity they deserve and perhaps less violencefrom that.
But let me mention another thing, and that is parents.  We need moms and dads helping raisekids.  Wherever possible, the benefit of having two parents in the home -- and that's notalways possible -- a lot of great single moms, single dads, but, gosh, to tell our kids thatbefore they have babies, they ought to think about getting married to someone, that's a greatidea, because if there’s a two-parent family, the prospect of living in poverty goes downdramatically.  The opportunities that the child will be able to achieve increase dramatically. So we can make changes in the way our culture works to help bring people away fromviolence and give them opportunity and bring them in the American system.
The greatest failure we’ve had with regards to gun violence in some respects is what is knownas Fast and Furious, which was a program under this administration.  And how it workedexactly I think we don't know precisely, but where thousands of automatic and AK-47-typeweapons were given to people that ultimately gave them to drug lords that used thoseweapons against their own citizens and killed Americans with them.  And this was a programof the government.  For what purpose it was put in place, I can't imagine.  But it’s one of thegreat tragedies related to violence in our society which has occurred during thisadministration, which I think the American people would like to understand fully. It’s been investigated to a degree, but the administration has carried out executive privilegeto prevent all the information from coming out.  I’d like to understand, who were the onesthat did this, what the idea was behind it, why it led to the violence.  Thousands of guns goingto Mexico --
Property of 
  
President Obama:  Candy.
Governor Romney:  -- drug lords --
Ms. Crowley:  Governor, if I could, the question was about these assault weapons that oncewere banned and are no longer banned.  I know that you signed an assault weapons banwhen you were in Massachusetts.  Obviously with this question, you no longer do supportthat.  Why is that?  Given the kind of violence that we see sometimes with these mass killings,why is that, that you’ve changed your mind?
Governor Romney:  Well, Candy, actually, in my state, the pro-gun folks and the anti-gunfolks came together and put together a piece of legislation.  And it’s referred to as an assaultweapon ban, but it had, at the signing of the bill, both the pro-gun and the anti-gun peoplecame together because it provided opportunities for both that both wanted.  There werehunting opportunities, for instance, that hadn’t previously been available and so forth.  So itwas a mutually agreed upon piece of legislation. That’s what we need more of, Candy.  Whatwe have right now in Washington is a place that’s gridlocked.
Ms. Crowley:  So if you could get people to agree to it, you’d be for it?
President Obama:  Candy.
Governor Romney:  We haven’t had the leadership in Washington to work at a bipartisanbasis.  I was able to do that in my state and bring these two together.
President Obama:  Candy.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President.
President Obama:  First of all, I think Governor Romney was for an assault weapons banbefore he was against it.  And he said that the reason he changed his mind was, in part,because he was seeking the endorsement of the National Rifle Association.  So that’s on therecord.
But I think that one area we agree on is the importance of parents and the importance ofschools -- because I do believe that if our young people have opportunity, then they’re lesslikely to engage in these kind of violent acts.  We’re not going to eliminate everybody who ismentally disturbed, and we’ve got to make sure that they don’t get weapons, but we canmake a difference in terms of ensuring that every young person in America, regardless ofwhere they come from, what they look like, have a chance to succeed.
Property of 
  
And, Candy, we haven’t had a chance to talk about education much, but I think it is veryimportant to understand that the reforms we’ve put in place, working with 46 governorsaround the country, are seeing schools that are some of the ones that are the toughest forkids starting to succeed -- we’re starting to see gains in math and science.
When it comes to community colleges, we are setting up programs, including with NassauCommunity College, to retrain workers, including young people who may have dropped out ofschool, but now are getting another chance -- training them for the jobs that exist right now. And in fact, employers are looking for skilled workers, and so we’re matching them up, givingthem access to higher education.  As I said, we have made sure that millions of young peopleare able to get an education that they weren’t able to get before.  Now --
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, I have to move you along here. You said you wanted to get thisquestion so we need to do it here.
President Obama:  Just one second, because this is important. This is part of the choice inthis election.  When Governor Romney was asked whether teachers -- hiring more teacherswas important to growing our economy, Governor Romney said that doesn’t grow oureconomy.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, it was guns here so I need to move us along.  The question wasguns so let me --
President Obama:  But this will make a difference in terms of whether or not we can movethis economy forward for these young people and reduce our violence.
Ms. Crowley:  Okay.  Thank you so much. I want to ask Carol Goldberg to stand up becauseshe gets to a question that both these men have been passionate about.  It’s for GovernorRomney.
Q:  The outsourcing of American jobs overseas has taken a toll on our economy.  What plansdo you have to put back and keep jobs here in the United States?
Governor Romney:  Boy, great question, an important question because you’re absolutelyright.  The place where we’ve seen manufacturing go has been China.  China is now thelargest manufacturer in the world -- used to be the United States of America.  A lot of goodpeople have lost jobs.  A half a million manufacturing jobs have been lost in the last fouryears -- that’s total over the last four years.  One of the reasons for that is that people thinkit’s more attractive in some cases to go offshore than to stay here.  We have made it lessattractive for enterprises to stay here than to go offshore from time to time. 
Property of 
  
What I will do as President is make sure it's more attractive to come to America again.  This isthe way we're going to create jobs in this country.  It's not by trickle-down government,saying we're going to take more money from people and hire more government workers, raisemore taxes, put in place more regulations.  Trickle-down government has never worked here,has never worked anywhere. 
I want to make America the most attractive place in the world for entrepreneurs, for smallbusiness, for big business to invest and grow in America.  Now, we're going to have to makesure that as we trade with other nations that they play by the rules, and China hasn't.  One ofthe reasons -- or one of the ways they don't play by the rules is artificially holding down thevalue of their currency.  Because if they put their currency down low, that means their priceson their goods are low, and that makes them advantageous in the marketplace.  We lose salesand manufacturers here in the U.S. making the same products can't compete. 
China has been a currency manipulator for years and years and years.  And the President hasa regular opportunity to label them as a currency manipulator, but refuses to do so.  On dayone, I will label China a currency manipulator, which will allow me as President to be able toput in place, if necessary, tariffs where I believe that they are taking unfair advantage of ourmanufacturers. 
So we're going to make sure the people we trade with around the world play by the rules.  Butlet me not just stop there.  Don't forget what's key to bringing back jobs here is not justfinding someone else to punish -- and I'm going to be strict with people who we trade with tomake sure they follow the law and play by the rules -- but it's also to make America the mostattractive place in the world for businesses of all kinds.  That's why I want to bring down thetax rates on small employers, big employers, so they want to be here.
Canada's tax rate on companies is now 15 percent.  Ours is 35 percent.  So if you're starting abusiness, where would you rather start it?  We have to be competitive if we're going to createmore jobs here.  Regulations have quadrupled -- the rate of regulations quadrupled under thisPresident.  I've talked to small businesses across the country.  They say, we feel like we'reunder attack from our own government.  I want to make sure that regulators see their job asencouraging small business, not crushing it.  And there's no question but that Obamacare hasbeen an extraordinary deterrent to enterprises of all kinds hiring people. 
My priority is making sure that we get more people hired.  If we have more people hired, if weget back manufacturing jobs, if we get back all kinds of jobs into this country, then you'regoing to see rising incomes again.  The reason incomes are down is because unemployment isso high.  I know what it takes to get this to happen.  And my plan will do that.  And one partof it is to make sure that we keep China playing by the rules.  Thank you.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, two minutes here because we are then going to go to our lastquestion. 
Property of 
  
President Obama:  We need to create jobs here.  And both Governor Romney and I agreeactually that we should lower our corporate tax rate.  It's too high.  But there's a difference interms of how we would do it.  I want to close loopholes that allow companies to deductexpenses when they move to China that allow them to profit offshore and not have to gettaxed, so they have tax advantages offshore.  All those changes in our tax code would make adifference. 
Now, Governor Romney actually wants to expand those tax breaks.  One of his big ideas whenit comes to corporate tax reform would be to say if you invest overseas, you make profitsoverseas, you don't have to pay U.S. taxes.  But of course, if you're a small business or amom-and-pop business or a big business starting up here, you've got to pay even the reducedrate that Governor Romney is talking about.  And it's estimated that that will create 800,000new jobs -- the problem is they'll be in China or India or Germany.  That's not the way we'regoing to create jobs here. 
The way we're going to create jobs here is not just to change our tax code, but also to doubleour exports.  And we are on pace to double our exports, one of the commitments I madewhen I was President.  That's creating tens of thousands of jobs all across the country.  That'swhy we've kept on pushing trade deals, but trade deals that make sure that American workersand American businesses are getting a good deal. 
Now, Governor Romney talked about China, as I already indicated.  In the private sector,Governor Romney's company invested in what were called "pioneers of outsourcing."  That'snot my phrase.  It's what reporters called it.  And as far as currency manipulation, thecurrency has actually gone up 11 percent since I’ve been President because we have pushedthem hard.  And we’ve put unprecedented trade pressure on China.  That's why exports havesignificantly increased under my presidency.  That's going to help to create jobs here.
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, we have a really short time for a quick discussion here.  iPad,the Macs, the iPhones -- they are all manufactured in China.  One of the major reasons islabor is so much cheaper here.  How do you convince a great American company to bring thatmanufacturing back here?
Governor Romney:  The answer is very straightforward:  We can compete with anyone inthe world as long as the playing field is level.  China has been cheating over the years -- one,by holding down the value of their currency; number two, by stealing our intellectual property-- our designs, our patents, our technology.  There’s even an Apple store in China that's acounterfeit Apple store selling counterfeit goods.  They hack into our computers.  We will haveto have people play on a fair basis.  That's number one.
Number two, we have to make America the most attractive place for entrepreneurs, for peoplewho want to expand a business.  That's what brings jobs in.  The President’s characterizationof my tax plan is --
Property of 
  
President Obama:  How much time you got, Candy?
Governor Romney:  -- is completely -- is completely --
Ms. Crowley:  Let me go to the --
Governor Romney:  -- is completely false.  Let me tell you.
Ms. Crowley:  Let me go to the President here because we really are --
President Obama:  All right, I’m --
Ms. Crowley:  -- because we really are running out of time. And the question is, can we everget -- we can't get wages like that.  It can't be sustained here.
President Obama:  Candy, there are some jobs that are not going to come back becausethey're low-wage, low-skill jobs.  I want high-wage, high-skill jobs.  That's why we have toemphasize manufacturing.  That's why we have to invest in advanced manufacturing.  That'swhy we’ve got to make sure that we’ve got the best science and research in the world.
And when we talk about deficits, if we’re adding to our deficit for tax cuts for folks who don'tneed them, and we’re cutting investments in research and science that will create the nextApple, create the next new innovation that will sell products around the world, we will losethat race.  If we’re not training engineers to make sure that they are equipped here in thiscountry, then companies won’t come here.  Those investments are what’s going to help tomake sure that we continue to lead this world economy not just next year, but 10 years fromnow, 50 years from now, 100 years from now.
Ms. Crowley:  Thanks, Mr. President.
Governor Romney:  Government does not create jobs.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor Romney.
Governor Romney:  Government does not create jobs.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor Romney, I want to introduce you to Barry Green because he’s goingto have the last question to you first. 
Governor Romney:  Barry?  Oh, there’s Barry.  Hi, Barry.
Property of 
  
Q:  Hi, Governor.  I think this is a tough question.  Each of you, what do you believe is thebiggest misperception that the American people have about you as a man and a candidate? Using specific examples, can you take this opportunity to debunk that misperception and setus straight?
Governor Romney:  Thank you, and that's an opportunity for me, and I appreciate it.  In thenature of a campaign, it seems that some campaigns are focused on attacking a person ratherthan prescribing their own future and the things they’d like to do.  In the course of that, Ithink the President’s campaign has tried to characterize me as someone who’s very differentthan who I am. I care about 100 percent of the American people.  I want 100 percent of theAmerican people to have a bright and prosperous future.  I care about our kids.  I understandwhat it takes to make a bright and prosperous future for America again.  I spent my life in theprivate sector, not in government.  I’m a guy who wants to help, with the experience I have,the American people. 
My passion probably flows from the fact that I believe in God and I believe we’re all children ofthe same God.  I believe we have a responsibility to care for one another.  I served as amissionary for my church.  I served as a pastor in my congregation for about 10 years.  I’vesat across the table from people who are out of work, and worked with them to try and findnew work, or to help them through tough times.
I went to the Olympics when they were in trouble to try and get them on track.  And asgovernor of my state, I was able to get 100 percent of my people insured, all my kids, about98 percent of the adults; was able also to get our schools ranked at number one in the nation,so 100 percent of our kids would have a bright opportunity for a future.
I understand that I can get this country on track again.  We don't have to settle for whatwe’re going through.  We don't have to settle for gasoline at $4.  We don't have to settle forunemployment at a chronically high level.  We don't have to settle for 47 million people onfood stamps.  We don't have to settle for 50 percent of kids coming out of college not able toget work.  We don't have to settle for 23 million people struggling to find a good job.
If I become President, I’ll get America working again.  I will get us on track to a balancedbudget.  The President hasn’t. I will.  I’ll make sure we can reform Medicare and SocialSecurity to preserve them for coming generations.  The President said he would.  He didn’t.
Ms. Crowley:  Governor --
Governor Romney:  I’ll get our incomes up.  And by the way, I’ve done these things.  Iserved as governor and showed I could get them done. 
Ms. Crowley:  Mr. President, last two minutes belong to you.
Property of 
  
President Obama:  Barry, I think a lot of this campaign, maybe over the last four years, hasbeen devoted to this notion that I think government creates jobs, that that somehow is theanswer.  That's not what I believe. 
I believe that the free enterprise system is the greatest engine of prosperity the world hasever known.  I believe in self-reliance and individual initiative, and risk-takers beingrewarded.  But I also believe that everybody should have a fair shot and everybody should dotheir fair share, and everybody should play by the same rules, because that's how oureconomy is grown.  That's how we built the world’s greatest middle class.  And that is part ofwhat's at stake in this election.  There's a fundamentally different vision about how we moveour country forward. 
I believe Governor Romney is a good man, loves his family, cares about his faith.  But I alsobelieve that when he said behind closed doors that 47 percent of the country considerthemselves victims, who refuse personal responsibility, think about who he was talking about-- folks on Social Security who have worked all their lives; veterans who have sacrificed forthis country; students who are out there trying to hopefully advance their own dreams butalso this country’s dreams; soldiers who are overseas fighting for us right now; people whoare working hard every day, paying payroll tax, gas taxes, but don't make enough income. 
And I want to fight for them.  That's what I’ve been doing for the last four years, because ifthey succeed, I believe the country succeeds. And when my grandfather fought in World WarII, and he came back, and he got a GI Bill and that allowed him to go to college, that wasn’t ahandout.  That was something that advanced the entire country.  And I want to make surethat the next generation has those same opportunities.  That's why I’m asking for your vote,and that's why I’m asking for another four years.
Ms. Crowley:  President Obama, Governor Romney, thank you for being here tonight. Onthat note, we have come to an end of this town hall debate.  Our thanks to the participants fortheir time, and to the people of Hofstra University for their hospitality. The next and finaldebate takes place Monday night at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Florida.  Don't forget towatch.  Election Day is three weeks from today.  Don't forget to vote.
Good night.
Property of 
