An earthquake and a hurricane may have delayed this day, but this is a day that would not bedenied.
For this day, we celebrate Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s return to the National Mall.  In thisplace, he will stand for all time, among monuments to those who fathered this nation andthose who defended it; a black preacher with no official rank or title who somehow gave voiceto our deepest dreams and our most lasting ideals, a man who stirred our conscience andthereby helped make our union more perfect.
And Dr. King would be the first to remind us that this memorial is not for him alone.  Themovement of which he was a part depended on an entire generation of leaders.  Many arehere today, and for their service and their sacrifice, we owe them our everlasting gratitude. This is a monument to your collective achievement.
Some giants of the civil rights movement -- like Rosa Parks and Dorothy Height, BenjaminHooks, Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth -- they’ve been taken from us these past few years.  Thismonument attests to their strength and their courage, and while we miss them dearly, weknow they rest in a better place. 
And finally, there are the multitudes of men and women whose names never appear in thehistory books -- those who marched and those who sang, those who sat in and those whostood firm, those who organized and those who mobilized -- all those men and women whothrough countless acts of quiet heroism helped bring about changes few thought were evenpossible. 
  
“By the thousands,” said Dr. King, “faceless, anonymous, relentless young people, black andwhite…have taken our whole nation back to those great wells of democracy which were dugdeep by the founding fathers in the formulation of the Constitution and the Declaration ofIndependence.”  To those men and women, to those foot soldiers for justice, know that thismonument is yours, as well.
Nearly half a century has passed since that historic March on Washington, a day whenthousands upon thousands gathered for jobs and for freedom.  That is what our schoolchildrenremember best when they think of Dr. King -- his booming voice across this Mall, calling onAmerica to make freedom a reality for all of God’s children, [prophesying] of a day when thejangling discord of our nation would be transformed into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood.
It is right that we honor that march, that we lift up Dr. King’s “I Have a Dream” speech -- forwithout that shining moment, without Dr. King’s glorious words, we might not have had thecourage to come as far as we have.  Because of that hopeful vision, because of Dr. King’smoral imagination, barricades began to fall and bigotry began to fade.  New doors ofopportunity swung open for an entire generation.  Yes, laws changed, but hearts and mindschanged, as well. 
Look at the faces here around you, and you see an America that is more fair and more freeand more just than the one Dr. King addressed that day.  We are right to savor that slow butcertain progress -- progress that’s expressed itself in a million ways, large and small, acrossthis nation every single day, as people of all colors and creeds live together, and worktogether, and fight alongside one another, and learn together, and build together, and loveone another.
So it is right for us to celebrate today Dr. King’s dream and his vision of unity.  And yet it isalso important on this day to remind ourselves that such progress did not come easily; thatDr. King’s faith was hard-won; that it sprung out of a harsh reality and some bitterdisappointments. 
It is right for us to celebrate Dr. King’s marvelous oratory, but it is worth remembering thatprogress did not come from words alone.  Progress was hard.  Progress was purchasedthrough enduring the smack of billy clubs and the blast of fire hoses.  It was bought with daysin jail cells and nights of bomb threats.  For every victory during the height of the civil rightsmovement, there were setbacks and there were defeats. 
We forget now, but during his life, Dr. King wasn’t always considered a unifying figure.  Evenafter rising to prominence, even after winning the Nobel Peace Prize, Dr. King was vilified bymany, denounced as a rabble rouser and an agitator, a communist and a radical. He was evenattacked by his own people, by those who felt he was going too fast or those who felt he wasgoing too slow; by those who felt he shouldn’t meddle in issues like the Vietnam War or therights of union workers.
  
We know from his own testimony the doubts and the pain this caused him, and that thecontroversy that would swirl around his actions would last until the fateful day he died.
I raise all this because nearly 50 years after the March on Washington, our work, Dr. King’swork, is not yet complete.  We gather here at a moment of great challenge and great change. In the first decade of this new century, we have been tested by war and by tragedy; by aneconomic crisis and its aftermath that has left millions out of work, and poverty on the rise,and millions more just struggling to get by.  Indeed, even before this crisis struck, we hadendured a decade of rising inequality and stagnant wages.  In too many troubledneighborhoods across the country, the conditions of our poorest citizens appear little changedfrom what existed 50 years ago -- neighborhoods with underfunded schools and broken-downslums, inadequate health care, constant violence, neighborhoods in which too many youngpeople grow up with little hope and few prospects for the future.
Our work is not done.  And so on this day, in which we celebrate a man and a movement thatdid so much for this country, let us draw strength from those earlier struggles.  First andforemost, let us remember that change has never been quick.  Change has never been simple,or without controversy.  Change depends on persistence.  Change requires determination.  Ittook a full decade before the moral guidance of Brown v. Board of Education was translatedinto the enforcement measures of the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act, but those 10long years did not lead Dr. King to give up.  He kept on pushing, he kept on speaking, he kepton marching until change finally came.
And then when, even after the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act passed, AfricanAmericans still found themselves trapped in pockets of poverty across the country, Dr. Kingdidn’t say those laws were a failure; he didn’t say this is too hard; he didn’t say, let’s settle forwhat we got and go home.  Instead he said, let’s take those victories and broaden our missionto achieve not just civil and political equality but also economic justice; let’s fight for a livingwage and better schools and jobs for all who are willing to work.  In other words, when metwith hardship, when confronting disappointment, Dr. King refused to accept what he called the“isness” of today.  He kept pushing towards the “oughtness” of tomorrow.
And so, as we think about all the work that we must do -- rebuilding an economy that cancompete on a global stage, and fixing our schools so that every child -- not just some, butevery child -- gets a world-class education, and making sure that our health care system isaffordable and accessible to all, and that our economic system is one in which everybody getsa fair shake and everybody does their fair share, let us not be trapped by what is.  We can’tbe discouraged by what is.  We’ve got to keep pushing for what ought to be, the America weought to leave to our children, mindful that the hardships we face are nothing compared tothose Dr. King and his fellow marchers faced 50 years ago, and that if we maintain our faith,in ourselves and in the possibilities of this nation, there is no challenge we cannot surmount.
  
And just as we draw strength from Dr. King’s struggles, so must we draw inspiration from hisconstant insistence on the oneness of man; the belief in his words that “we are caught in aninescapable network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of destiny.”  It was that insistence,rooted in his Christian faith, that led him to tell a group of angry young protesters, “I love youas I love my own children,” even as one threw a rock that glanced off his neck. 
It was that insistence, that belief that God resides in each of us, from the high to the low, inthe oppressor and the oppressed, that convinced him that people and systems could change. It fortified his belief in non-violence.  It permitted him to place his faith in a government thathad fallen short of its ideals.  It led him to see his charge not only as freeing black Americafrom the shackles of discrimination, but also freeing many Americans from their ownprejudices, and freeing Americans of every color from the depredations of poverty.    And so at this moment, when our politics appear so sharply polarized, and faith in ourinstitutions so greatly diminished, we need more than ever to take heed of Dr. King’steachings.  He calls on us to stand in the other person’s shoes; to see through their eyes; tounderstand their pain.  He tells us that we have a duty to fight against poverty, even if we arewell off; to care about the child in the decrepit school even if our own children are doing fine;to show compassion toward the immigrant family, with the knowledge that most of us areonly a few generations removed from similar hardships.
To say that we are bound together as one people, and must constantly strive to see ourselvesin one another, is not to argue for a false unity that papers over our differences and ratifies anunjust status quo.  As was true 50 years ago, as has been true throughout human history,those with power and privilege will often decry any call for change as “divisive.”  They’ll sayany challenge to the existing arrangements are unwise and destabilizing.  Dr. King understoodthat peace without justice was no peace at all; that aligning our reality with our ideals oftenrequires the speaking of uncomfortable truths and the creative tension of non-violent protest.
But he also understood that to bring about true and lasting change, there must be thepossibility of reconciliation; that any social movement has to channel this tension through thespirit of love and mutuality. 
If he were alive today, I believe he would remind us that the unemployed worker can rightlychallenge the excesses of Wall Street without demonizing all who work there; that thebusinessman can enter tough negotiations with his company’s union without vilifying the rightto collectively bargain.  He would want us to know we can argue fiercely about the proper sizeand role of government without questioning each other’s love for this country -- with theknowledge that in this democracy, government is no distant object but is rather an expressionof our common commitments to one another.  He would call on us to assume the best in eachother rather than the worst, and challenge one another in ways that ultimately heal ratherthan wound.
  
In the end, that’s what I hope my daughters take away from this monument.  I want them tocome away from here with a faith in what they can accomplish when they are determined andworking for a righteous cause.  I want them to come away from here with a faith in otherpeople and a faith in a benevolent God.  This sculpture, massive and iconic as it is, will remindthem of Dr. King’s strength, but to see him only as larger than life would do a disservice towhat he taught us about ourselves.  He would want them to know that he had setbacks,because they will have setbacks.  He would want them to know that he had doubts, becausethey will have doubts.  He would want them to know that he was flawed, because all of ushave flaws.
It is precisely because Dr. King was a man of flesh and blood and not a figure of stone that heinspires us so.  His life, his story, tells us that change can come if you don’t give up.  Hewould not give up, no matter how long it took, because in the smallest hamlets and thedarkest slums, he had witnessed the highest reaches of the human spirit; because in thosemoments when the struggle seemed most hopeless, he had seen men and women andchildren conquer their fear; because he had seen hills and mountains made low and roughplaces made plain, and the crooked places made straight and God make a way out of no way.
  And that is why we honor this man -- because he had faith in us.  And
that is why he belongs on this Mall -- because he saw what we might become.  That is whyDr. King was so quintessentially American -- because for all the hardships we’ve endured, forall our sometimes tragic history, ours is a story of optimism and achievement and constantstriving that is unique upon this Earth.  And that is why the rest of the world still looks to usto lead.  This is a country where ordinary people find in their hearts the courage to doextraordinary things; the courage to stand up in the face of the fiercest resistance and despairand say this is wrong, and this is right; we will not settle for what the cynics tell us we have toaccept and we will reach again and again, no matter the odds, for what we know is possible.
That is the conviction we must carry now in our hearts.  As tough as times may be, I know wewill overcome.  I know there are better days ahead.  I know this because of the man toweringover us.  I know this because all he and his generation endured -- we are here today in acountry that dedicated a monument to that legacy. 
  
And so with our eyes on the horizon and our faith squarely placed in one another, let us keepstriving; let us keep struggling; let us keep climbing toward that promised land of a nationand a world that is more fair, and more just, and more equal for every single child of God.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
