Good evening. There are still some very important votes to be taken by members of Congress,but I want to announce that the leaders of both parties, in both chambers, have reached anagreement that will reduce the deficit and avoid default -- a default that would have had adevastating effect on our economy.
The first part of this agreement will cut about $1 trillion in spending over the next 10 years --cuts that both parties had agreed to early on in this process. The result would be the lowestlevel of annual domestic spending since Dwight Eisenhower was President -- but at a levelthat still allows us to make job-creating investments in things like education and research. Wealso made sure that these cuts wouldn’t happen so abruptly that they’d be a drag on a fragileeconomy. 
Now, I've said from the beginning that the ultimate solution to our deficit problem must bebalanced. Despite what some Republicans have argued, I believe that we have to ask thewealthiest Americans and biggest corporations to pay their fair share by giving up tax breaksand special deductions. Despite what some in my own party have argued, I believe that weneed to make some modest adjustments to programs like Medicare to ensure that they’re stillaround for future generations. 
That's why the second part of this agreement is so important. It establishes a bipartisancommittee of Congress to report back by November with a proposal to further reduce thedeficit, which will then be put before the entire Congress for an up or down vote. In this stage,everything will be on the table.
  
To hold us all accountable for making these reforms, tough cuts that both parties would findobjectionable would automatically go into effect if we don’t act. And over the next fewmonths, I’ll continue to make a detailed case to these lawmakers about why I believe abalanced approach is necessary to finish the job. 
Now, is this the deal I would have preferred? No. I believe that we could have made the toughchoices required -- on entitlement reform and tax reform -- right now, rather than through aspecial congressional committee process. But this compromise does make a serious downpayment on the deficit reduction we need, and gives each party a strong incentive to get abalanced plan done before the end of the year. 
Most importantly, it will allow us to avoid default and end the crisis that Washington imposedon the rest of America. It ensures also that we will not face this same kind of crisis again insix months, or eight months, or 12 months. And it will begin to lift the cloud of debt and thecloud of uncertainty that hangs over our economy. 
Now, this process has been messy; it’s taken far too long. I've been concerned about theimpact that it has had on business confidence and consumer confidence and the economy as awhole over the last month. Nevertheless, ultimately, the leaders of both parties have foundtheir way toward compromise. And I want to thank them for that. 
Most of all, I want to thank the American people. It’s been your voices -- your letters, youremails, your tweets, your phone calls -- that have compelled Washington to act in the finaldays. And the American people's voice is a very, very powerful thing. 
We’re not done yet. I want to urge members of both parties to do the right thing and supportthis deal with your votes over the next few days. It will allow us to avoid default. It will allowus to pay our bills. It will allow us to start reducing our deficit in a responsible way. And it willallow us to turn to the very important business of doing everything we can to create jobs,boost wages, and grow this economy faster than it's currently growing. 
That’s what the American people sent us here to do, and that’s what we should be devoting allof our time to accomplishing in the months ahead. 
Thank you very much, everybody.
