Good evening.  Today I authorized two operations in Iraq -- targeted airstrikes to protect ourAmerican personnel, and a humanitarian effort to help save thousands of Iraqi civilians whoare trapped on a mountain without food and water and facing almost certain death.  Let meexplain the actions we’re taking and why.    
First, I said in June -- as the terrorist group ISIL began an advance across Iraq -- that theUnited States would be prepared to take targeted military action in Iraq if and when wedetermined that the situation required it.  In recent days, these terrorists have continued tomove across Iraq, and have neared the city of Erbil, where American diplomats and civiliansserve at our consulate and American military personnel advise Iraqi forces. 
To stop the advance on Erbil, I’ve directed our military to take targeted strikes against ISILterrorist convoys should they move toward the city.  We intend to stay vigilant, and takeaction if these terrorist forces threaten our personnel or facilities anywhere in Iraq, includingour consulate in Erbil and our embassy in Baghdad.  We’re also providing urgent assistance toIraqi government and Kurdish forces so they can more effectively wage the fight against ISIL.
Second, at the request of the Iraqi government -- we’ve begun operations to help save Iraqicivilians stranded on the mountain.1  As ISIL has marched across Iraq, it has waged a ruthlesscampaign against innocent Iraqis.  And these terrorists have been especially barbaric towardsreligious minorities, including Christian and Yezidis, a small and ancient religious sect. Countless Iraqis have been displaced.  And chilling reports describe ISIL militants rounding upfamilies, conducting mass executions, and enslaving Yezidi women. 
  
In recent days, Yezidi women, men and children from the area of Sinjar have fled for theirlives.  And thousands -- perhaps tens of thousands -- are now hiding high up on themountain, with little but the clothes on their backs.  They’re without food, they’re withoutwater.  People are starving.  And children are dying of thirst.  Meanwhile, ISIL forces belowhave called for the systematic destruction of the entire Yezidi people, which would constitutegenocide.  So these innocent families are faced with a horrible choice:  descend the mountainand be slaughtered, or stay and slowly die of thirst and hunger.
I’ve said before, the United States cannot and should not intervene every time there’s a crisisin the world.  So let me be clear about why we must act, and act now.  When we face asituation like we do on that mountain -- with innocent people facing the prospect of violenceon a horrific scale, when we have a mandate to help -- in this case, a request from the Iraqigovernment -- and when we have the unique capabilities to help avert a massacre, then Ibelieve the United States of America cannot turn a blind eye.  We can act, carefully andresponsibly, to prevent a potential act of genocide.  That’s what we’re doing on that mountain.
I’ve, therefore, authorized targeted airstrikes, if necessary, to help forces in Iraq as they fightto break the siege of Mount Sinjar and protect the civilians trapped there.  Already, Americanaircraft have begun conducting humanitarian airdrops of food and water to help thesedesperate men, women and children survive.  Earlier this week, one Iraqi in the area cried tothe world, "There is no one coming to help." Well today, America is coming to help.  We’realso consulting with other countries -- and the United Nations -- who have called for action toaddress this humanitarian crisis. 
I know that many of you are rightly concerned about any American military action in Iraq,even limited strikes like these.  I understand that.  I ran for this office in part to end our warin Iraq and welcome our troops home, and that’s what we’ve done.  As Commander-in-Chief, Iwill not allow the United States to be dragged into fighting another war in Iraq.  And so evenas we support Iraqis as they take the fight to these terrorists, American combat troops will notbe returning to fight in Iraq, because there’s no American military solution to the larger crisisin Iraq.  The only lasting solution is reconciliation among Iraqi communities and stronger Iraqisecurity forces. 
However, we can and should support moderate forces who can bring stability to Iraq.  So evenas we carry out these two missions, we will continue to pursue a broader strategy thatempowers Iraqis to confront this crisis.  Iraqi leaders need to come together and forge a newgovernment that represents the legitimate interests of all Iraqis, and that can fight backagainst the threats like ISIL.  Iraqis have named a new President, a new Speaker ofParliament, and are seeking consensus on a new Prime Minister.  This is the progress thatneeds to continue in order to reverse the momentum of the terrorists who prey on Iraq’sdivisions.
  
Once Iraq has a new government, the United States will work with it and other countries inthe region to provide increased support to deal with this humanitarian crisis andcounterterrorism challenge.  None of Iraq’s neighbors have an interest in this terrible sufferingor instability.
And so we’ll continue to work with our friends and allies to help refugees get the shelter andfood and water they so desperately need, and to help Iraqis push back against ISIL.  Theseveral hundred American advisors that I ordered to Iraq will continue to assess what morewe can do to help train, advise and support Iraqi forces going forward.  And just as Iconsulted Congress on the decisions I made today, we will continue to do so going forward.
My fellow Americans, the world is confronted by many challenges.  And while America hasnever been able to right every wrong, America has made the world a more secure andprosperous place.  And our leadership is necessary to underwrite the global security andprosperity that our children and our grandchildren will depend upon.  We do so by adhering toa set of core principles.  We do whatever is necessary to protect our people.  We support ourallies when they’re in danger.  We lead coalitions of countries to uphold international norms. And we strive to stay true to the fundamental values -- the desire to live with basic freedomand dignity -- that is common to human beings wherever they are.  That’s why people all overthe world look to the United States of America to lead.  And that’s why we do it.
So let me close by assuring you that there is no decision that I take more seriously than theuse of military force.  Over the last several years, we have brought the vast majority of ourtroops home from Iraq and Afghanistan.  And I’ve been careful to resist calls to turn time andagain to our military, because America has other tools in our arsenal than our military.  Wecan also lead with the power of our diplomacy, our economy, and our ideals.
But when the lives of American citizens are at risk, we will take action.  That’s myresponsibility as Commander-in-Chief.  And when many thousands of innocent civilians arefaced with the danger of being wiped out, and we have the capacity to do something about it,we will take action.  That is our responsibility as Americans.  That’s a hallmark of Americanleadership.  That’s who we are.
So tonight, we give thanks to our men and women in uniform  -— especially our brave pilotsand crews over Iraq who are protecting our fellow Americans and saving the lives of so manymen, women and children that they will never meet.  They represent American leadership atits best.  As a nation, we should be proud of them, and of our country’s enduring commitmentto uphold our own security and the dignity of our fellow human beings.
God bless our Armed Forces, and God bless the United States of America.
1 Reference is to Sinjar or Shengal Mountain, which is, or is part of, a mountainous ridge located near the Yezidi Kurdish city of Sinjarin Nineveh province, Northwestern Iraq.
