Hello, Michigan! Thank you.  Thank you so much.  First of all, give Joe a big round of applausefor the wonderful introduction. We've got some special guests here -- now, if everybody haschairs, go ahead and use them. Feel free.  We've got some special guests here today that Ijust want to acknowledge.  All of you are special, but these folks I want to make sure that youhave a chance to see them.
First of all, one of the best governors in the country, please give Jennifer Granholm a biground of applause. Lieutenant Governor John Cherry -- give John a big round of applause. One of my favorite people, a former colleague of mine, still just a fighter on behalf of workingfamilies each and every day -- Senator Debbie Stabenow.  We've got Speaker of the House,Andy Dillon, in the house.  We've got a lot of other local elected officials, and I just want tothank them.
A couple of people who are missing:  Carl Levin, who is doing great work.  He's in the Senateright now fighting on behalf of a bill to make sure that we're not loading up a bunch ofnecessary defense spending with unnecessary defense spending.  So he's the point person onit.  The only reason he's not here is because he is working alongside the administration to getthis bill done.  Please give him a big round of applause.  Congressman Sandy Levin, alsoworking hard on your behalf each and every day, but is not here today.  I want to go aheadand acknowledge the new mayor, since he's the new mayor -- Mayor Dave Bing, great ballplayer. My game is a little like Dave Bing's -- except I don't have the jump shot or the speedor the ball handling skills -- or the endurance.  Also don't have the afro.  Don't think I forgotthat, Dave.  I remember. I remember that.

I also want to acknowledge that we've got the Executive Director of the White House Councilon Auto Communities and Workers, who's working hard, has a direct line to me each andevery day.  He's traveling constantly back here -- Ed Montgomery.  Please give Ed a big roundof applause.
And the Chairman of the Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indian Tribe, DerekBailey is here.  Please give Derek a big round of applause.
And finally, the president of the college where we are here, Jim Jacobs.  Give Jim Jacobs a biground of applause.
And those of you who I've missed, you know how grateful I am that you're here.  And thankyou all.  It is wonderful to be back at Macomb.  It was terrific visiting this campus as acandidate, but I have to admit, it's even better visiting as a President.
Now, this is a place where anyone -- anyone with a desire to learn and to grow, to take theircareer to a new level or start a new career altogether -- has the opportunity to pursue theirdream, right here in Macomb.  This is a place where people of all ages and all backgrounds --even in the face of obstacles, even in the face of very difficult personal challenges -- can takea chance on a brighter future for themselves and their families.
There are folks like Joe, who just told us his story.  When Joe lost his job, he decided to takeadvantage of assistance for displaced workers.  He earned his associate degree here atMacomb, and with a pretty impressive GPA, I might add.  And with the help of that degree,Joe found a new job, working for the new Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital as amaintenance mechanic, using the skills he learned here and the talents that he brought tomake a fresh start.
There are workers like Kellie Kulman, who is here today. Where's Kellie?  Raise your hand,Kellie.  Where are you?  There you are.  There's Kellie right there.  Kellie is a UAW worker at aFord plant in Sterling Heights, Michigan.  She used to drive a fork lift, right?  But then shedecided to train here at Macomb for a job that required new skills, and now she's anapprentice pipe fitter.  It's a telling example:  Even as this painful restructuring takes place inour auto industry, workers are seeking out training for new auto jobs.  And Joe and Kellie'sstory make clear what all of you know:  Community colleges are an essential part of ourrecovery in the present -- and our prosperity in the future.  This place can make the futurebetter, not just for these individuals but for America.
Now, since this recession began 20 months ago, 6.5 million Americans have lost their jobs,and I don't have to tell you Michigan in particular has been hard-hit.  Now, I -- the statisticsare daunting.  The whole country now, the unemployment rate is approaching 10 percent. Here in Michigan, it's about five points higher.  And new jobs of course are going to be comingout and we're going to see continuing job loss even as the economy is beginning to stabilize.

Now, that's not just abstractions.  Those just aren't numbers on a page.  Those areextraordinary hardships, tough times, for families and individuals who've worked hard all theirlives and have done the right things all their lives.  If you haven't lost a job, chances are youknow somebody who has:  a family member, a neighbor, a friend, a coworker.  And you knowthat as difficult as the financial struggle can be, the sense of loss is about more than just apaycheck, because most of us define ourselves by the work we do.  That's part of what itmeans to be an American.  We take pride in work -- that sense that you're contributing,supporting your family, meeting your responsibilities.  People need work not just for income,but because it makes you part of that fabric of a community that's so important.  And so whenyou lose your job, and when entire communities are losing thousands of jobs, that's a heavyburden, that's a heavy weight.
Now, my administration has a job to do, as well, and that job is to get this economy back onits feet.  That's my job. And it's a job I gladly accept.  I love these folks who helped get us inthis mess and then suddenly say, well, this is Obama's economy.  That's fine.  Give it to me. My job is to solve problems, not to stand on the sidelines and harp and gripe.
So I welcome the job.  I want the responsibility.  And I know that -- let's just take anexample.  Many questioned our efforts to help save GM and Chrysler from collapse earlier thisyear.  Their feeling was these companies were driven to the brink by poor managementdecisions over a long period of time, and like any business they should be held accountable forthose decisions.  I agree that they should be held accountable.  But I also recognize thehistoric significance and economic prominence of these companies in communities all acrossMichigan and all across the country.
I thought about the hundreds of thousands of Americans whose livelihoods are still connectedto the American auto industry, and the impact on an already struggling economy, especiallyright here in Michigan.  So I said that if Chrysler and GM were willing to fundamentallyrestructure their businesses and make the hard choices necessary to become competitive nowand in the future, it was a process worth supporting.
Now today, after a painful period of soul-searching and sacrifice, both GM and Chrysler haveemerged from bankruptcy.  Remember, folks said there was no way they could do it?  They'vegotten it done already, in record time -- far faster than anybody thought possible.  They'vegot a leaner structure, they've got new management, and a viable vision of how to competeand win in the 21st century.  Those sacrifices were shared among all the stakeholders: workers and management; creditors and shareholders; retirees and communities.  Andtogether, they've made the rebirth of Chrysler and GM possible.
It was the right thing to do.

But even with this positive news, the hard truth is, is that some of the jobs that have beenlost in the auto industry and elsewhere won't be coming back.  They're the casualties of achanging economy.  In some cases, just increased productivity in the plants themselvesmeans that some jobs aren't going to return.  And that only underscores the importance ofgenerating new businesses and new industries to replace the ones that we've lost, and ofpreparing our workers to fill the jobs they create.  For even before this recession hit, we werefaced with an economy that was simply not creating or sustaining enough new, well-payingjobs.
So now is the time to change all that.  What we face is far more than a passing crisis.  This isa transformative moment.  And in this moment we must do what other generations havedone.  It's not the time to shrink from the challenges we face or put off tough decisions. That's what Washington has done for decades, and it's exactly why I ran for President -- tochange that mindset.  Now is the time to build a firmer, stronger foundation for growth thatwill not only withstand future economic storms, but that will help us thrive and compete in aglobal economy.  To build that foundation, we have to slow the growth of health care coststhat are driving us into debt.  We're going to have to do that, and there's going to be a majordebate over the next three weeks.  And don't be fooled by folks trying to scare you, saying wecan't change the health care system.  We have no choice but to change the health caresystem, because right now it's broken for too many Americans.
We're going to have to make tough choices necessary to bring down deficits.  But don't letfolks fool you -- the best way to start bringing down deficits is to get control of our health carecosts, which is why we need reform.
Now is the time to create the jobs of the future by growing industries, including a new cleanenergy economy.  And Jennifer Granholm has been all on top of this as the governor ofMichigan.  She is bring cleaning [sic] energy jobs right here to Michigan, and we've got tosupport her in that effort.
I want Michigan to build windmills and wind turbines and solar panels and biofuel plants andenergy-efficient light bulbs and weatherize all our -- because, Michigan, you know badweather.  So you can be all on top of weatherizing.  You need to weatherize.  I know aboutthat in Chicago too.
But we also have to ensure that we're educating and preparing our people for the new jobs ofthe 21st century.  We've got to prepare our people with the skills they need to compete in thisglobal economy. Time and again, when we placed our bet for the future on education, wehave prospered as a result -- by tapping the incredible innovative and generative potential ofa skilled American workforce.  That's what happened when President Lincoln signed into lawlegislation creating the land grant colleges, which not only transformed higher education, butalso our entire economy.  That's what took place when President Roosevelt signed the GI Billwhich helped educate a generation, and ushered in an era of unprecedented prosperity.  Thatwas the foundation for the American middle class.

And that's why, at the start of my administration I set a goal for America:  By 2020, thisnation will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.  We usedto have that.  We're going to have it again. And we've begun to take historic steps to achievethis goal.  Already we've increased Pell grants by $500. We've created a $2,500 tax credit forfour years of college tuition. We've simplified student aid applications and ensured that aid isnot based on the income of a job that you just lost. A new GI Bill of Rights for the 21stcentury is beginning to help soldiers coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan to begin a newlife -- in a new economy.  And the recovery plan has helped close state budget shortfalls --which put enormous pressure on public universities and community colleges -- at the sametime making historic investments in school libraries and classrooms and facilities all acrossAmerica.  So we've already taken some steps that are building the foundation for a 21stcentury education system here in America, one that will allow us to compete with China andIndia and everybody else all around the world.
But today I'm announcing the most significant down payment yet on reaching the goal ofhaving the highest college graduation rate of any nation in the world.  We're going to achievethis in the next 10 years.  And it's called the American Graduation Initiative.  It will reformand strengthen community colleges like this one from coast to coast so they get the resourcesthat students and schools need -- and the results workers and businesses demand.  Throughthis plan, we seek to help an additional 5 million Americans earn degrees and certificates inthe next decade -- 5 million.
Not since the passage of the original GI Bill and the work of President Truman's Commissionon Higher Education -- which helped to double the number of community colleges andincrease by seven-fold enrollment in those colleges -- have we taken such a historic step onbehalf of community colleges in America.  And let me be clear:  We pay for this plan -- thisisn't adding to the deficit; we're paying for this plan -- by ending the wasteful subsidies wecurrently provide to banks and private lenders for student loans.  That will save tens of billionsof dollars over the next 10 years.  Instead of lining the pockets of special interests, it's timethis money went towards the interests of higher education in America.  That's what myadministration is committed to doing.
Now, I know that for a long time there have been politicians who have spoken of training as asilver bullet and college as a cure-all.  It's not, and we know that.  I can't tell you how manyworkers who've been laid off, you talk to them about training and they say, "Training forwhat?"  So I understand the frustrations that a lot of people have, especially if the training isnot well designed for the specific jobs that are being created out there.
But we know that in the coming years, jobs requiring at least an associate degree areprojected to grow twice as fast as jobs requiring no college experience.  We will not fill thosejobs -- or even keep those jobs here in America -- without the training offered by communitycolleges.  That's why I want to applaud Governor Granholm for the No Worker Left Behindprogram.  It's providing up to two years' worth of free tuition at community colleges anduniversities across the state.  The rest of the country should learn from the effort.

This is training to become a medical technician, or a health IT worker, or a lab specialist, or anurse.  In fact, 59 percent of all new nurses come from community colleges.  This is trainingto install solar panels and build those wind turbines we were talking about and develop asmarter electricity grid.  And this is the kind of education that more and more Americans areusing to improve their skills and broaden their horizons.  Many young people are savingmoney by spending two years at community college before heading to a four-year college. And more workers who have lost their jobs -- or fear losing a job -- are seeking an edge atschools like this one.
At the same time, community colleges are under increasing pressure to cap enrollments andscrap courses and cut costs as states and municipalities face budget shortfalls.  And this is inaddition to the challenges you face in the best of times, as these schools receive far lessfunding per student than typical four-year colleges and universities.  So community collegesare an undervalued asset in our country.  Not only is that not right, it's not smart.  That's whyI've asked Dr. Jill Biden -- who happens to be a relation of the Vice President, Joe Biden, butwho is also a community college educator for more than 16 years -- to promote communitycolleges and help us make community colleges stronger.  And that's why we're putting inplace this American Graduation Initiative.
Let me describe for you the specifics of what we're going to do.  Number one, we will offercompetitive grants, challenging community colleges to pursue innovative, results-orientedstrategies in exchange for federal funding.  We'll fund programs that connect students lookingfor jobs with businesses that are looking to hire.  We'll challenge these schools to find newand better ways to help students catch up on the basics, like math and science, that areessential to our competitiveness.  We'll put colleges and employers together to createprograms that match curricula in the classroom with the needs of the boardroom.
These are all kinds of -- there are all kinds of examples of what's possible.  We've seen Cisco,for example, working with community colleges to prepare students and workers for jobsranging from work in broadband to health IT.  We know that the most successful communitycolleges are those that partner with the private sector.  So we want to encourage morecompanies to work with schools to build these type of relationships.  That way, whensomebody goes through a training program, they know that there's a job at the end of thattraining.
We'll also create a new research center with a simple mission:  to measure what works andwhat doesn't.  All too often, we don't know what happens when somebody walks out of aclassroom and onto the factory floor or into the library or -- the laboratory or the office.  Andthat means businesses often can't be sure what a degree is really worth.  And schoolsthemselves don't have the facts to make informed choices about which programs receive --achieve results and which programs don't.  And this is important, not just for businesses andcolleges, but for students and workers, as well.  If a parent is going to spend time in theclassroom and away from his or her family -- especially after a long day at work -- thatdegree really has to mean something.

They have to know that when they get that degree, this is going to help advance their goals. If a worker is going to spend two years training to enter into a whole new profession, thatcertificate has to mean that he or she is ready, and that businesses are ready to hire.
In addition, we want to propose new funding for innovative strategies that promote not justenrollment in a community college program, but completion of that program.  See, more thanhalf -- more than half of all students who enter community college to earn an associatedegree, or transfer to a four-year school to earn a bachelor's degree, unfortunately fail toreach their goal.  That's not just a waste of a valuable resource, that's a tragedy for thesestudents.  Oftentimes they've taken out debt and they don't get the degree, but they still haveto pay back the debt.  And it's a disaster for our economy.
So we'll fund programs that track student progress inside and outside the classroom.  Let'sfigure out what's keeping students from crossing that finish line, and then put in place reformsthat will remove those barriers.  Maybe it becomes too difficult for a parent to be away fromhome, or too expensive for a waiter or a nurse to miss a shift.  Maybe a young student justisn't sure if her education will lead to employment.  The point is, we need to figure outsolutions for these kinds of challenges -- because facing these impediments shouldn't preventyou from reaching your potential.
All right, so that's a big chunk of this first part of this initiative.  The second part:  We're goingto back $10 billion in loans to renovate and rebuild college classrooms and buildings all acrossthe country. All too often, community colleges are treated like the stepchild of the highereducation system; they're an afterthought, if they're thought of at all.  And that meansschools are often years behind in the facilities they provide, which means, in a 21st centuryeconomy, they're years behind in the education they can offer.  That's a mistake and it's onethat we'll help to correct.  Through this fund, schools will have the chance to borrow at a moreaffordable rate to modernize facilities, and they'll be building on the funds in the recovery planthat are already helping to renovate schools, including community colleges all across thecountry.  And by the way, not only does this improve the schools and the training that they'reproviding, guess what?  You also have to hire some workers and some tradesmen and womento do the work on those schools.  So it means it's putting people to work in Michigan righthere right now.
Number three:  Even as we repair bricks and mortar, we have an opportunity to build a newvirtual infrastructure to complement the education and training community colleges can offer. So we're going to support the creation of a new online, open-source clearinghouse of coursesso that community colleges across the country can offer more classes without building moreclassrooms.  And this will make a big difference especially for rural campuses that a lot oftimes have struggled -- attract -- have to struggle to attract students and faculty.  And thiswill make it possible for a professor to complement his lecture with an online exercise, or for astudent who can't be away from her family to still keep up with her coursework.

We don't know where this kind of experiment will lead, but that's exactly why we ought to tryit because I think there's a possibility that online education can provide especially for peoplewho are already in the workforce and want to retrain the chance to upgrade their skillswithout having to quit their job.
So let me say this more:  The road to recovery, the road to prosperity, is going to be hard.  Itwas never going to be easy.  When I was sworn in, we were seeing 700 [thousand] jobs lostthat month.  Then we had the same amount lost for two more consecutive months.  Nowwe've got an average of about 400,000 jobs lost -- but we're still losing too many jobs.  Wewill get to the point where we're not losing jobs, but then we've got to start getting to thepoint where we're actually creating jobs.
And it's going to take time.  There are going to be false starts and there are going to besetbacks.  But I am confident that we can meet the challenges we face, because that's whatwe've always done.  That's what America does.  We hit some challenges, we fuss and argueabout it, and then we go ahead and go about the business of solving our problems.  That'swhat we see on display right here at Macomb Community College.  That's what I've seen atcolleges and universities all across this country.  At every juncture in our history when we'vebeen challenged, we have summoned the resilience and the industriousness -- that can-doAmerican spirit -- that has allowed us to succeed in the face of even the toughest odds.
That's what we can and must do now, not just to overcome this crisis, but to leave somethingbetter behind, to lay a foundation on which our children and our grandchildren can prosperand take responsibility for their future -- just as the students at this school, at this difficultmoment, are taking responsibility for theirs.
I am absolutely confident that if I've got your help, that we can make it happen, and we aregoing to see a stronger, more prosperous Michigan in the years to come.
Thank you very much, Warren.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.