Scripture tells us that when Joshua and the Israelites arrived at the gates of Jericho, theycould not enter. The walls of the city were too steep for any one person to climb. They weretoo strong to be taken down by brute force. And so, the people sat for days, unable to pass onthrough; but God had a plan for His People. He told them to stand together and marchtogether around the city, and on the seventh day he told them that when they heard thesound of the ram’s horn, they should speak with one voice. And, at the chosen hour when thehorn sounded and a chorus of voices cried out together, the mighty walls of Jericho cametumbling down. That’s what scripture tells us.
And there are many lessons to take from this passage, just as there are many lessons to takefrom this day, just as there are many memories that fill the space of this church. As I wasthinking about which ones we needed to remember at this hour, my mind went back to thevery beginning of the modern Civil Rights era. Because before Memphis and the mountaintop,before the bridge in Selma and the march on Washington, before Birmingham and thebeatings, the fire hoses, and the loss of those four little girls, before there was King the iconand his magnificent dream, there was King the young preacher and a people who foundthemselves suffering under the yolk of oppression. And on the eve of the bus boycotts in 

Montgomery, at a time when many were still doubtful about the possibilities of change, a timewhen there were those in the black community who not only mistrusted each other, butmistrusted themselves -- King inspired with words not of anger, but of an urgency, a fierceurgency that still speaks to us today. “Unity,” he said, “is the great need of the hour.” “Unityis the great need of the hour.” Unity is how we shall overcome.
What Dr. King understood is that if just one person chose to walk instead of ri[de] the bus,those walls of oppression would not be moved. But maybe if a few more decided to walk,those foundations might start to shake. If just a few women were willing to do what RosaParks had been willing to do, maybe the cracks in those walls would start to show. Ifteenagers took rides from North to South, maybe a few bricks would come loose. Maybe ifwhite folks marched because they’d come to understand that their freedom was wrapped up inthe freedom of others, that they too had a stake in the impending battle, the walls wouldbegin to sway, and if enough Americans were awakened to injustice, if they joined togetherNorth and South, rich and poor, Jew and Gentile, then perhaps that wall would come tumblingdown, and justice would flow like waters of righteousness, like a mighty stream. “Unity is thegreat need of the hour.” That’s what Dr. King said. It is the great need of this hour as well,not because it sounds pleasant, not because it makes us feel good, but because it's the onlyway we can overcome the essential deficit that exits in this country.
I’m not talking about the budget deficit. I’m not talking about the trade deficit. Talking aboutthe moral deficit in this country. I’m talking about an empathy deficit, the inability torecognize ourselves in one another, to understand that we are our brother’s keeper and oursister’s keeper, that in the words of Dr. King, “We are all tied together in a single garment ofdestiny.” We have an empathy deficit when we’re still sending our children down corridors ofshame, schools in the forgotten corners of America where the color of your skin still affectsthe content of your education.
We have a deficit when CEOs are making more in ten minutes than ordinary workers aremaking in an entire year, when families lose their homes so unscrupulous lenders can make aprofit, when mothers can’t afford a doctor when their children are stricken with illness.
We have a deficit in this country when we have Scooter Libby justice for some and Jenajustice for others, when our children see hanging nooses from a school yard tree today, in thepresent, in the 21st century.
We have a deficit when homeless veterans sleep on the streets of our cities, when innocentsare slaughtered in the deserts of Darfur, when young Americans serve tour after tour aftertour after tour of duty in a war that should have never been authorized and should have neverbeen waged.

We have an empathy deficit in this country that has to be closed. We have a deficit when ittakes a breach in the levees to reveal the breach in our compassion, when it takes a terriblestorm to reveal the hungry that God calls on us to feed, the sick that He calls on us to carefor, the least of these that He commands that we treat as our own. So, we have a deficit toclose. We have walls, barriers to justice and equality that must come down, and to do this, weknow that “unity is the great need of the hour.”
However, all too often, when we talk about unity in this country, we’ve come to believe that itcan be purchased on the cheap. We’ve come to believe that racial reconciliation can comeeasily; that it’s just a matter of a few ignorant people trapped in the prejudices of the past,and that if the demagogues and those who would exploit our racial divisions will simply goaway then all our problems will be solved. All too often, we seek to ignore the profoundstructural and institutional barriers that stand in the way of insuring opportunity for all of ourchildren, or decent jobs for all of our people, or health care for those who are sick. We offerunity, but we are not willing to pay the price that's required  
Of course, true unity cannot be so easily purchased. It starts with a change in attitudes. Itstarts with changing our hearts, and changing our minds, broadening our spirit. It’s not easyto stand in somebody else’s shoes. It’s not easy to see past our own differences. We’ve allencountered this in our own lives. What makes it even more difficult is that we have a politicsin this country that seeks to drive us apart, that puts up walls between us. We are told thatthose who differ from us on a few things, differ from us on all things, that our problems arethe fault of those who don’t think like us or look like us or come from where we do. TheWelfare Queen, she’s taking our money. The Immigrant, he’s taking our jobs. The believercondemns the nonbeliever as immoral, and the nonbeliever chides the believer for beingintolerant.
And for most of this country’s history, we in the African-American community have been atthe receiving end of man’s inhumanity to man. And all of us understand insidious -- All of usunderstand intimately the insidious role that race still sometimes plays on the job and in theschools, in our health care system, and in our criminal justice system.
And yet, if we are honest with ourselves, we must admit that none of our hands are entirelyclean. If we’re honest with ourselves, we'll acknowledge that our own community has notalways been true to King’s vision of a beloved community. If we’re honest with ourselves, wehave to admit that there have been times when we've scorned our gay brothers and sistersinstead of embracing them. The scourge of anti-Semitism has at times revealed itself in ourcommunity. For too long, some of us have seen immigrants only as competitors for jobsinstead of companions in the fight for opportunity. Everyday our politics fuels and exploits thiskind of division across all races and regions, across gender and party. It is played out ontelevision; it is sensationalized by the media. Last week, it crept into the campaign forPresident with charges and countercharges that serve to obscure the issues instead ofilluminating the critical choices we face as a nation. None of our hands are clean.

So let us say that on this day of all days, each of us carries with us the task of changing ourhearts and minds. The divisions, the stereotypes, the scapegoating, the ease with which weblame the plight of ourselves on others -- all of that distracts us from the common challengesthat we face, war and poverty, inequality and injustice. We can no longer afford to buildourselves up by tearing each other down. We can no longer afford to traffic in lies or fear orhate. It's the poison that we must purge from our politics, the wall that we must tear downbefore the hour grows too late. Because if Dr. King could love his jailer, if he could call on thefaithful, who once sat where you do, to forgive those who had set dogs and fire hoses uponthem, then surely we can look past what divides us in our time and bind up our wounds anderase the sympathy deficit that exists in our hearts.
But if changing our hearts and our minds is the first critical step, we cannot stop there. It’snot enough to bemoan the plight of the poor in this country and remain unwilling to push ourelected officials to provide the resources to fix our schools. It's not enough to decry thedisparities of health care and yet allow the insurance companies and the drug companies toblock real reform in our health care system. It’s not enough -- It’s not enough for us to abhorthe costs of a misguided war, and yet we continue to allow ourselves to be driven by a politicsof fear that sees the threat of an attack as a way to scare up votes instead of a call to cometogether in a common effort.
Scripture tells us that we are judged not just by word but by deed. And if we are truly to bringabout the unity that is needed, that is so crucial in this time, we have to find it withinourselves to act on what we know, to understand that living up to this country’s ideals and itspossibilities is going to require great effort and great resources, sacrifice and stamina. Wecan’t pass a law called No Child Left Behind and then leave the money behind. That is not aserious effort in bringing about the unity that is needed. We can’t celebrate Dr. King’s dream,and yet still have insufficient funds to cash that promissory note that was promised at thebeginning of this nation.
That is what is at stake in this great debate we are having today. Changes that are neededare not just a matter of tinkering around the edges. They will not come if politicians simply tellus what we want to hear. All of us will be called upon to make some sacrifice. None of us willbe exempt from responsibility. We've had to fight to fix our schools, but we also have tochallenge ourselves to be better parents, and turn off the television set, and put away thevideo game, and our men have to be home with our children. That, too, is part of thechallenge that we must make.
We will have to confront the biases in our criminal justice system, but we also have toacknowledge the deep-seeded violence that still resides in our own communities, in too manyof the hearts of our young people, and we have to break the grip of that violence wherever wesee it. That’s how we’re going to bring about the change that we seek. That’s how Dr. King ledthis country through the wilderness.

He did it with words, words that he spoke not just to the children of slaves but the children ofslave owners, words that inspired not just black but also white, not just Christian but also Jewand Muslim and Buddhists and Atheists, not just the southerner but also the northerner. Heled with words, but he also led with deeds. He also led by example. He led by marching andgoing to jail and suffering threats and beatings and being away from his family. He led bytaking a stand against a war knowing full well that it would diminish his popularity. He led bychallenging our economic structures, understanding that it would cause discomfort. Dr. Kingunderstood that unity cannot be won on the cheap, that we would have to earn it throughgreat effort and determination. That’s the unity, the hard earned unity that we need rightnow. That is the effort, the determination that can transform blind optimism into hope.
You know people have remarked on the fact that I talk about hope a lot in my campaign. Youknow they -- they tease me a little bit. Some have been scornful. They say, “Ah, he’s talkingabout hope again. He’s so idealistic. He’s so naïve. He’s a hope monger.” That’s okay. It’strue. I talk about hope. I talk about it a lot because the odds of me standing here today are sosmall, so remote that I couldn’t of gotten here without some hope. You know my -- my daddyleft me when I was two years old. I needed some hope to get here. I was raised by a singlemother. I needed some hope to get here. I got in trouble when I was a teenager, did somethings folks now like to talk about. I needed some hope to get here. I wasn’t born into money,or great wealth, or great privilege, or status. I was given love, an education, and some hope.That’s what I got. That’s my birthright.
So I talk about hope. I -- I put “Hope” on my campaign signs. It doesn’t even have my nameon them sometimes -- just says “Hope.” Folks don’t know who they’re voting for, but it makesthem feel good. Say, you know, huh? I spoke about hope at the Democratic Convention. I -- Iwrote a book called The Audacity of Hope. And so I -- so I’m puzzled when -- when somepeople, some of the other candidates make a mockery of the idea. They say I’m pedaling falsehopes. "Get a reality check," they tell me. And I have to -- I have to try to understand whatthey're saying. The implication is is that if you are hopeful, that you somehow must beengaging in wishful thinking. Your -- Your head must be in the clouds; that you must bepassive and just sit back and wait for things to happen to you. That seems to be theimplication.
And so I have to explain to people that’s not what hope is. Hope is not blind optimism. Hope isnot ignorance of the barriers and hurdles and hazards that stand in your way. Hope’s just theopposite. I know how hard it will be to provide health care to every single American. Theinsurance companies, drug companies, they don’t want to give up their profits. I know it won’tbe easy to have a energy policy that makes sense for America because the oil companies likewriting the energy bills. I know that alleviating poverty, or making sure all our children canlearn, or eliminating the scourge of racism in our society -- none of those things lendthemselves to simple solutions.

I know because I fought on the streets as a community organizer in poor neighborhoods onthe Southside of Chicago alongside those without jobs or without prospects for the future. Ihave fought in the courts as a civil rights attorney for those who had been denied opportunityon the job or denied access to the ballot box. I’ve seen good legislation die because -- Well,I’ve seen that too -- I’ve seen good legislation die because good intentions weren’t enough,because they weren’t fortified with a political majority and political will. I’ve seen this country-- this country’s judgment clouded by fear. I know how easily a country can be misled when itis afraid. I know how hard it is. Everybody here understands how difficult it is to bring abouttrue change, change that we can believe in. But I also know this -- that nothing in this countryworthwhile has ever happened except somebody somewhere decided to hope.
That’s how this country was founded because a group of patriots decided they were going totake on the British Empire. Nobody was putting their money on them. That’s how slaves andabolitionists resisted that evil system. That’s how a new President was able to chart a courseto insure that this nation would no longer remain half slave and half free. That’s how thegreatest generation defeated Fascism and overcame a Great Depression. That’s how womenwon the right to vote. That’s how workers won the right to organize. That’s how young peopleand old people and middle-aged folks were willing to walk instead of ride the bus, and folkscame down on Freedom Rides. They marched, and they sat in, and they were beaten and firehouses were sent on them, and dogs were sent on them, and some went to jail, and somedied for freedom's cause. That’s what hope is. Imagining and then fighting for and strugglingfor and sometimes dying for what didn’t seem possible before. There’s nothing naïve aboutthat. There are no false hopes in that.
I don’t believe in false hopes. Imagine if John F. Kennedy had looked up at the moon andsaid, "Well, that’s too far." False hopes, we can’t go there. If Dr. King had stood on the LincolnMemorial and said, "Y’all go home; we can’t overcome." There’s no such thing as false hopes,but what I know deep in my heart is that we cannot bring about change unless we are unified,unless we do it together. Change does not happen from the top down -- in America oranywhere else. It happens from the bottom up. It happens because ordinary people dreamextraordinary things. It’s because all of you decide that change must come. That I know.
It wasn’t just one voice -- It wasn't just one voice that shouted out before the walls of Jericho.All the voices came together, a chorus of voices. That’s what gives me hope: not just thosewho ascend to high office, but the changes that are happening in ordinary places. The storiesthat give me my hope don’t happen in the spotlight. When I think about Dr. King, I suspect hewas sustained not by having dinner with Presidents; not by getting the Nobel Peace Prize; butcoming back to church and seeing the mothers of the church and the deacons. Those whomaintained their dignity were standing up straight in the face of injustice. That’s where hedrew his hope. He saw God in their faces. Those stories don’t happen on a presidential stage;they happen in the quiet quarters of our lives. They happen in the moments we least expect.So, let me close by giving an example of one of those stories.

There is a young woman, 23 years old, white woman, named Ashley Baia, who organizes forour campaign in Florence, South Carolina. Ashley has been working to organize mostly blackfolks. She’s in Florence, South Carolina. She’s been doing it since the beginning of thecampaign, and the other day she...set up a round table discussion where everyone aroundwas telling their story about who they were and why they were there. And so, Ashleyexplained, she started things off, by explaining why she was there. And she explained thatwhen she was nine years old her mother got cancer, and because she had to miss a day ofwork she was let go; and she lost her health care; and then she had to file for bankruptcy.They were on hard times, and that’s when Ashley, nine-years-old at the time, decided she hadto do something to help her mom, and she knew that food was one of their most expensivecosts. They didn’t have a lot of money. Ashley lived in a poor household.
And so Ashley convinced her mother that she really liked and really wanted to eat more thananything else mustard and relish sandwiches. She had heard that condiments like mustardand relish were cheap. And she -- she concocted in her own mind at the age of nine that shewould convince her mother that that’s the only thing she wanted to eat everyday, because shefigured that would be a way of saving money for the family and helping them alleviate theirhardships. So she did this for a year until her mom got better. And in that round table she toldeveryone that the reason she joined our campaign was so that she could help millions of otherchildren in the country who want and need to help their parents too. She had heard me speakabout my mother having cancer and having to worry about maybe not getting the health careshe needed because of a preexisting condition, and she had connected with that. She thought,maybe Barack would fight for my mother. And if he would fight for my mother, then maybe Iwill fight alongside him. That’s what had brought her to Florence.
So Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks everyone else whythey’re supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and different reasons: somebring up specific issues; some talk about, upset about, affirmative action; some talk about,you know, "I want to see more jobs in the community"; some are frustrated about trade;some just like me.
So they all got a bunch of different reasons, and finally, at the end of this discussion, theycome to this elderly black man. He’s been sitting there quiet the whole time, hasn’t beensaying a word. And Ashley asks him why is he there. And he doesn’t bring up a specific issue.He does not say healthcare or the economy. He doesn’t talk about the Iraq War. He doesn’tsay anything about education. He doesn’t say that he’s there because he likes Barack Obama,or he’s proud of the possibility of the first African American President. He simply says toeveryone in the room, “I am here because of Ashley. I am here because of this young girl,and the fact that she's willing to fight for what she believes in. And that reminds me that I stillhave some fight left in me, and I’m going stand up for what I believe in.”
Now, by itself, that single moment of recognition between that young white girl and that oldblack man, that’s not enough to change a country. By itself, it’s not enough to give healthcare to the sick or jobs to the jobless or education to our children, but it is where we begin.

It’s why I believe that the walls in that room began to shake at that moment. And if they canshake in that room, then they can shake here in Atlanta, and if they can shake in Atlanta,then they can shake in the state of Georgia, and if they can shake in Georgia, they can shakeall across America. And if enough of our voices join together, if we see each other in eachother’s eyes, we can bring those walls tumbling down. The walls of Jericho can finally cometumbling down.
That is our hope, but only if we pray together, if we work together, and if we march together.Ebenezer, we cannot walk alone. Brothers and sisters, we cannot walk alone. In the strugglefor justice and for equality, we cannot walk alone. In the struggle for opportunity and justice,we cannot walk alone. In the struggle to heal this nation and repair the world, we cannot walkalone. So I ask you to walk with me and march with me and join your voices with mine, andtogether we will sing the song that tears down the walls that divide us and lift up an Americathat is truly indivisible with liberty and justice for all.
May God bless the memory of the great pastor of this church.
And may God bless the United States of America.
Thank you. Thank you.