Good evening.  Erev Tov. 
The Talmud teaches that if a person destroys one life, it is as if they’ve destroyed an entireworld, and if a person saves one life, it is as if they’ve saved an entire world.
What an extraordinary honor to be with you as we honor four Righteous individuals whosecourage is measured in the lives they saved -- one child, one refugee, one comrade at a time-- and who, in so doing, helped save our world.
I deliver a lot of speeches.  Very rarely am I so humbled by the eloquence that has precededme -- not just in words, but in the acts that we commemorate today.
To my dear friend, Steven Spielberg, thanks for your moving and generous words.  You spokeof the importance of finding your voice and using it for good, and I know that your work --whether a masterpiece like Schindler’s List or the stories that you have so persistentlypreserved through the Shoah Foundation -- is deeply personal.  Steven once said that thestory of the Shoah is the story that he was born to tell, rooted in those childhood memoriesthat he just gave you a taste of -- the relatives lost, the stories you heard from your family.  
  
And, Steven, the whole world is grateful that you found your voice, and for the good thatyou’ve done with that voice.  It will endure for generations.  And so, on behalf of all of us, weare grateful.
To Ambassador and Mrs. Dermer, to Nina Totenberg, our friends from the Israeli Embassy andYad Vashem -- thank you so much for hosting us today. 
Let me just add tonight that our thoughts are also with former Israeli President ShimonPeres.  I had the opportunity to speak with Shimon earlier this week.  I thanked him for hisfriendship, which has always meant so much to me, personally.  And I thanked him, onceagain, for the shining example of his leadership.  With his extraordinary life -- in the Haganah,and as a founding father of the State of Israel, a statesman who has never given up on peace,an embodiment of the great alliance between our two nations -- Shimon inspires us all.  Andthis evening we speak for all of us -- Israelis, Americans, people around the world -- inwishing him a full and speedy recovery.
I also want to just note the presence of two of our outstanding senators from the great stateof Tennessee.  I know that it’s rare where you have such a extraordinary native of the statebeing honored in this way, but I think it’s also worth noting that this represents the bipartisanand steadfast support of members of Congress for the security and prosperity of the state ofIsrael.  And they act on that every single day.
To the survivors, families of the Righteous and those they saved, to all the distinguishedguests:  We gather to honor the newest of the Righteous Among the Nations and make realthe call to “never forget,” not just on this day of remembrance, but for all days and for alltime.  
And at moments like this, as I listened to the extraordinary stories of the four that we honor,memories come rushing back of the times that I’ve encountered the history and the horror ofthe Shoah -- growing up, hearing the stories of my great uncle who helped liberate Ohrdruf,part of Buchenwald, and who returned home so shaken by the suffering that he had seen thatmy grandmother would tell me he did not speak to anyone for six months, just went up in hisattic, couldn’t fully absorb the horror that he had witnessed. 
Then having the opportunity to go to Buchenwald myself with my dear friend, Elie Wiesel, andseeing the ovens, the Little Camp where he was held as a boy.  Standing with survivors in theOld Warsaw Ghetto.  And then the extraordinary honor of walking through Yad Vashem withRabbi Lau and seeing the faces and hearing the voices of the lost, of blessed memory. Andthen taking my own daughters to visit the Holocaust Museum -- because our children mustknow this chapter of our history, and that we must never repeat it.
  
The four lives we honor tonight make a claim on our conscience, as well as our moralimagination.  We hear their stories, and we are forced to ask ourselves, under the samecircumstances, how would we act?  How would we answer God’s question, where are you? Would we show the love of Walery and Maryla Zbijewski?  There, in Warsaw, they could havebeen shot for opening their home to a five-year-old girl.  Yet they cared for her like one oftheir own, gave her safety and shelter and moments of warmth, of family and music -- ashield from the madness outside until her mother could return.
Would we have the extraordinary compassion of Lois Gunden?  She wrote that she simplyhoped to “add just another ray of love to the lives of these youngsters” who had alreadyendured so much.  And by housing and feeding as many Jewish children as she could, her rayof love always shone through, and still burns within the families of those she saved.
Would we have the courage of Master Sergeant Roddie Edmonds? I know your dad said hewas just doing his job, but he went above and beyond the call of duty, and so did all thosewho joined in that line.  Faced with a choice of giving up his fellow soldiers or saving his ownlife, Roddie looked evil in the eye and dared a Nazi to shoot.  His moral compass neverwavered.  He was true to his faith, and he saved some 200 Jewish American soldiers as aconsequence.  It’s an instructive lesson, by the way, for those of us Christians.  I cannotimagine a greater expression of Christianity than to say, I, too, am a Jew.
And I ask these questions because, even as the Holocaust is unique, a crime without parallelin history, the seeds of hate that gave rise to the Shoah -- the ignorance that conspires witharrogance, the indifference that betrays compassion -- those seeds have always been withus.  They have found root across cultures, and across faiths, and across generations.  TheAmbassador mentioned the story of Cain and Abel.  It's deep within us.  Too often, especiallyin times of change, especially in times of anxiety and uncertainty, we are too willing to giveinto a base desire to find someone else -- someone different -- to blame for our struggles. 
Here, tonight, we must confront the reality that around the world, anti-Semitism is on therise.  We cannot deny it.  When we see some Jews leaving major European cities -- wheretheir families have lived for generations -- because they no longer feel safe; when Jewishcenters are targeted from Mumbai to Overland Park, Kansas; when swastikas appear oncollege campuses -- when we see all that and more, we must not be silent. 
An attack on any faith is an attack on all of our faiths.  It is an attack on that Golden Rule atthe heart of so many faiths -- that we ought to do unto others as we would have done to us. For Americans, in particular, we should understand that it’s an attack on our diversity, on thevery idea that people of different backgrounds can live together and thrive together.  Which iswhy -- your father was right -- we are all Jews.  Because anti-Semitism is a distillation, anexpression of an evil that runs through so much of human history, and if we do not answerthat, we do not answer any other form of evil.  When any Jew anywhere is targeted just forbeing Jewish, we all have to respond as Roddie Edmonds did -- “We are all Jews.”
  
We know that we’ll never be able to wipe out hatred from every single mind.  We won'tentirely erase the scourge of anti-Semitism.  But like the Righteous, we must do everythingwe can. All of us have a responsibility.
Certainly government has a responsibility.  As President, I’ve made sure that the UnitedStates is leading the global fight against anti-Semitism.  And it’s why, with Israel andcountries around the world, we organized the first United Nations General Assembly meetingon anti-Semitism.  It’s why we’ve urged other nations to dedicate a special envoy to thisthreat, as we have. 
It’s why, when a statue of an anti-Semitic leader from World War II was planned in Hungary,we led the charge to convince their government to reverse course.  This was not a side noteto our relations with Hungary, this was central to maintaining a good relationship with theUnited States, and we let them know.
It’s why, when voices around the world veer from criticism of a particular Israeli policy to anunjust denial of Israel’s right to exist, when Israel faces terrorism, we stand up forcefully andproudly in defense of our ally, in defense of our friend, in defense of the Jewish State ofIsrael.  America’s commitment to Israel’s security remains, now and forever, unshakeable. And I've said this before -- it would be a fundamental moral failing if America broke that bond.
All nations that prize diversity and tolerance and pluralism must speak out whenever andwherever Jews and other religious minorities are attacked.  In recent years, we’ve seenleaders in France, Germany, and Great Britain stand strongly against anti-Semitism.  InIsrael, President Rivlin has spoken eloquently about the need for tolerance and acceptanceamong all Israelis -- Jewish and Arab. 
Meanwhile, governments have an obligation to care for the survivors of the Shoah -- becauseno one who endured that horror should have to scrape by in their golden years.  So, with ourWhite House initiative, we’re working to improve care for Holocaust survivors in need here inthe United States.  And with the compensation fund we helped create, claims are finally beingpaid that even more Jews deported from France during the Holocaust, including survivors herein America, can benefit from.
But the task before us does not fall on government alone.  Every faith community has aresponsibility.  Just as all religions speak out against those who try to twist their faith tojustify terrorism and violence, just as all faiths need to speak out when interpretations of theirreligion veer in an ugly direction, so, too, must they speak out against those who use theirfaith to justify bias against Jews, or people of any faith. 
We know that there were Muslims -- from Albanians to Arabs  -- who protected Jews fromNazis.  In Morocco, leaders from Muslim-majority countries around the world just held asummit on protecting religious minorities, including Jews and Christians.
  
His Holiness Pope Francis has spoken forcefully against anti-Semitism, saying, “Every humanbeing, as a creature of God, is our brother, regardless of his origins or religious beliefs.” These are the voices we must heed.  And anyone who claims to be a religious leader mustproject that vision, that truth.
And finally, all of us have a responsibility to speak out, and to teach what’s right to ourchildren, and to examine our own hearts.  That’s the lesson of the Righteous we honor today -
- the lesson of the Holocaust itself:   Where are you?  Who are you?  That's the question thatthe Holocaust poses to us.  We have to consider even in moments of peril, even when wemight fear for our own lives, the fact that none of us are powerless.  We always have achoice.  And today, for most of us, standing up against intolerance doesn’t require the samerisks that those we honor today took.  It doesn’t require imprisonment or that we face downthe barrel of a gun.  It does require us to speak out. It does require us to stand firm.  Weknow that evil can flourish if we stand idly by.
And so we’re called to live in a way that shows that we’ve actually learned from our past.  Andthat means rejecting indifference.  It means cultivating a habit of empathy, and recognizingourselves in one another; to make common cause with the outsider, the minority, whetherthat minority is Christian or Jew, whether it is Hindu or Muslim, or a nonbeliever; whether thatminority is native born or immigrant; whether they’re Israeli or Palestinian. 
It means taking a stand against bigotry in all its forms, and rejecting our darkest impulsesand guarding against tribalism as the only value in our communities and in our politics.  Itmeans heeding the lesson repeated so often in the Torah:  To welcome the stranger, for wewere once strangers, too.  That’s how we never forget -- not simply by keeping the lessons ofthe Shoah in our memories, but by living them in our actions.  As the book of Deuteronomyteaches us, “Tzedek, Tzedek tirdof” -- “Justice, Justice you shall pursue.”
I want to close with what I’m told is a Jewish legend.  It’s said that within every generationthere are 36 virtuous individuals -- individuals so honorable, so filled with compassion, thattheir good works sustain the very existence of the world.  They are called Lamed Vovniks, andwithout them, society crumbles, according to the legend.  We don’t know who they are. They’re entirely indistinguishable, ordinary people -- like Walery and Maryla and Lois andRoddie.  You wouldn’t necessarily recognize them in a crowd.  But I believe that theirgeneration -- the generation of Schindler and Wallenberg and Karski -- demanded a lot morethan 36.  It called for more than 26,000 Righteous Among the Nations.  It called for themillions of heroes who did not go quietly and who stood up and fought back.
And may we all strive to live up to their noble example, to be the Lamed Vovniks of ourgeneration, to do our part to sustain each other and to embrace the humanity that we share,and in so doing, save our world.  May the memory of the lost be a blessing. And as nationsand individuals, may we always strive be among the Righteous. 
God bless you. God bless the United States of America. And God bless the State of Israel.
