Selamat pagi. [Good morning.] It is wonderful to be here at the University of Indonesia.  Tothe faculty and the staff and the students, and to Dr. Gumilar Rusliwa Somantri, thank you somuch for your hospitality.
Assalamualaikum dan salam sejahtera. [Peace be upon you and may God be with you.] Thankyou for this wonderful welcome.  Thank you to the people of Jakarta and thank you to thepeople of Indonesia.
Pulang kampung nih. [Back to/in my hometown].  I am so glad that I made it back toIndonesia and that Michelle was able to join me.  We had a couple of false starts this year, butI was determined to visit a country that’s meant so much to me.  And unfortunately, this visitis too short, but I look forward to coming back a year from now when Indonesia hosts theEast Asia Summit.
  
Before I go any further, I want to say that our thoughts and prayers are with all of thoseIndonesians who are affected by the recent tsunami and the volcanic eruptions -- particularlythose who’ve lost loved ones, and those who’ve been displaced.  And I want you all to knowthat as always, the United States stands with Indonesia in responding to natural disasters,and we are pleased to be able to help as needed.  As neighbors help neighbors and familiestake in the displaced, I know that the strength and the resilience of the Indonesian people willpull you through once more.
Let me begin with a simple statement:  Indonesia bagian dari didi saya.  I first came to thiscountry when my mother married an Indonesian named Lolo Soetoro.  And as a young boy Iwas -- as a young boy I was coming to a different world.  But the people of Indonesia quicklymade me feel at home. Jakarta -- now, Jakarta looked very different in those days.  The city was filled with buildingsthat were no more than a few stories tall.  This was back in 1967, ‘68 -- most of you weren’tborn yet.  The Hotel Indonesia was one of the few high rises, and there was just one bigdepartment store called Sarinah.  That was it. Betchaks and bemos, that’s how you gotaround.  They outnumbered automobiles in those days.  And you didn’t have all the bighighways that you have today.  Most of them gave way to unpaved roads and the kampongs. So we moved to Menteng Dalam, where -- hey, some folks from Menteng Dalam right here. And we lived in a small house.  We had a mango tree out front.  And I learned to loveIndonesia while flying kites and running along the paddy fields and catching dragonflies,buying satay and baso from the street vendors. I still remember the call of the vendors. Satay!  I remember that.  Baso!  But most of all, I remember the people -- the old men andwomen who welcomed us with smiles; the children who made a foreign child feel like aneighbor and a friend; and the teachers who helped me learn about this country. Because Indonesia is made up of thousands of islands, and hundreds of languages, and peoplefrom scores of regions and ethnic groups, my time here helped me appreciate the commonhumanity of all people.  And while my stepfather, like most Indonesians, was raised a Muslim,he firmly believed that all religions were worthy of respect.  And in this way -- in this way hereflected the spirit of religious tolerance that is enshrined in Indonesia’s Constitution, and thatremains one of this country’s defining and inspiring characteristics. Now, I stayed here for four years -- a time that helped shape my childhood; a time that sawthe birth of my wonderful sister, Maya; a time that made such an impression on my motherthat she kept returning to Indonesia over the next 20 years to live and to work and to travel -
- and to pursue her passion of promoting opportunity in Indonesia’s villages, especiallyopportunity for women and for girls.  And I was so honored -- I was so honored whenPresident Yudhoyono last night at the state dinner presented an award on behalf of mymother, recognizing the work that she did.  And she would have been so proud, because mymother held Indonesia and its people very close to her heart for her entire life.
  
So much has changed in the four decades since I boarded a plane to move back to Hawaii.  Ifyou asked me -- or any of my schoolmates who knew me back then -- I don’t think any of uscould have anticipated that one day I would come back to Jakarta as the President of theUnited States.  And few could have anticipated the remarkable story of Indonesia over theselast four decades. The Jakarta that I once knew has grown into a teeming city of nearly 10 million, withskyscrapers that dwarf the Hotel Indonesia, and thriving centers of culture and of commerce. While my Indonesian friends and I used to run in fields with water buffalo and goats -- a newgeneration of Indonesians is among the most wired in the world -- connected through cellphones and social networks. And while Indonesia as a young nation focused inward, a growingIndonesia now plays a key role in the Asia Pacific and in the global economy.  Now, this change also extends to politics.  When my stepfather was a boy, he watched hisown father and older brother leave home to fight and die in the struggle for Indonesianindependence.  And I’m happy to be here on Heroes Day to honor the memory of so manyIndonesians who have sacrificed on behalf of this great country. When I moved to Jakarta, it was 1967, and it was a time that had followed great suffering andconflict in parts of this country.  And even though my stepfather had served in the Army, theviolence and killing during that time of political upheaval was largely unknown to me becauseit was unspoken by my Indonesian family and friends.  In my household, like so many othersacross Indonesia, the memories of that time were an invisible presence.  Indonesians hadtheir independence, but oftentimes they were afraid to speak their minds about issues. In the years since then, Indonesia has charted its own course through an extraordinarydemocratic transformation -- from the rule of an iron fist to the rule of the people.  In recentyears, the world has watched with hope and admiration as Indonesians embraced the peacefultransfer of power and the direct election of leaders.  And just as your democracy is symbolizedby your elected President and legislature, your democracy is sustained and fortified by itschecks and balances:  a dynamic civil society; political parties and unions; a vibrant mediaand engaged citizens who have ensured that -- in Indonesia -- there will be no turning backfrom democracy. But even as this land of my youth has changed in so many ways, those things that I learnedto love about Indonesia -- that spirit of tolerance that is written into your Constitution;symbolized in mosques and churches and temples standing alongside each other; that spiritthat’s embodied in your people -- that still lives on.  Bhinneka Tunggal Ika -- unity indiversity. This is the foundation of Indonesia’s example to the world, and this is why Indonesiawill play such an important part in the 21st century. So today, I return to Indonesia as a friend, but also as a President who seeks a deep andenduring partnership between our two countries.  Because as vast and diverse countries; asneighbors on either side of the Pacific; and above all as democracies -- the United States andIndonesia are bound together by shared interests and shared values.
  
 Yesterday, President Yudhoyono and I announced a new Comprehensive Partnership betweenthe United States and Indonesia.  We are increasing ties between our governments in manydifferent areas, and -- just as importantly -- we are increasing ties among our people.  This isa partnership of equals, grounded in mutual interests and mutual respect. So with the rest of my time today, I’d like to talk about why the story I just told -- the story ofIndonesia since the days when I lived here -- is so important to the United States and to theworld.  I will focus on three areas that are closely related, and fundamental to humanprogress -- development, democracy and religious faith. First, the friendship between the United States and Indonesia can advance our mutual interestin development. When I moved to Indonesia, it would have been hard to imagine a future in which theprosperity of families in Chicago and Jakarta would be connected.  But our economies are nowglobal, and Indonesians have experienced both the promise and the perils of globalization: from the shock of the Asian financial crisis in the ‘90s, to the millions lifted out of povertybecause of increased trade and commerce.  What that means -- and what we learned in therecent economic crisis -- is that we have a stake in each other’s success. America has a stake in Indonesia growing and developing, with prosperity that is broadlyshared among the Indonesian people -- because a rising middle class here in Indonesia meansnew markets for our goods, just as America is a market for goods coming from Indonesia.  Sowe are investing more in Indonesia, and our exports have grown by nearly 50 percent, and weare opening doors for Americans and Indonesians to do business with one another.
America has a stake in an Indonesia that plays its rightful role in shaping the global economy. Gone are the days when seven or eight countries would come together to determine thedirection of global markets.  That’s why the G20 is now the center of international economiccooperation, so that emerging economies like Indonesia have a greater voice and also beargreater responsibility for guiding the global economy.  And through its leadership of the G20’santi-corruption group, Indonesia should lead on the world stage and by example in embracingtransparency and accountability. America has a stake in an Indonesia that pursues sustainable development, because the waywe grow will determine the quality of our lives and the health of our planet.  And that’s whywe’re developing clean energy technologies that can power industry and preserve Indonesia’sprecious natural resources -- and America welcomes your country’s strong leadership in theglobal effort to combat climate change. Above all, America has a stake in the success of the Indonesian people.  Underneath theheadlines of the day, we must build bridges between our people, because our future securityand prosperity is shared.  And that is exactly what we’re doing -- by increasing collaborationamong our scientists and researchers, and by working together to foster entrepreneurship. 
  
And I’m especially pleased that we have committed to double the number of American andIndonesian students studying in our respective countries.  We want more Indonesian studentsin American schools, and we want more American students to come study in this country.  Wewant to forge new ties and greater understanding between young people in this youngcentury. These are the issues that really matter in our daily lives.  Development, after all, is not simplyabout growth rates and numbers on a balance sheet.  It’s about whether a child can learn theskills they need to make it in a changing world.  It’s about whether a good idea is allowed togrow into a business, and not suffocated by corruption.  It’s about whether those forces thathave transformed the Jakarta I once knew -- technology and trade and the flow of people andgoods -- can translate into a better life for all Indonesians, for all human beings, a life markedby dignity and opportunity. Now, this kind of development is inseparable from the role of democracy.     Today, we sometimes hear that democracy stands in the way of economic progress.  This isnot a new argument.  Particularly in times of change and economic uncertainty, some will saythat it is easier to take a shortcut to development by trading away the right of human beingsfor the power of the state.  But that’s not what I saw on my trip to India, and that is not whatI see here in Indonesia.  Your achievements demonstrate that democracy and developmentreinforce one another.  Like any democracy, you have known setbacks along the way.  America is no different.  Ourown Constitution spoke of the effort to forge a “more perfect union,” and that is a journey thatwe’ve traveled ever since.  We’ve endured civil war and we struggled to extend equal rights toall of our citizens.  But it is precisely this effort that has allowed us to become stronger andmore prosperous, while also becoming a more just and a more free society. Like other countries that emerged from colonial rule in the last century, Indonesia struggledand sacrificed for the right to determine your destiny.  That is what Heroes Day is all about --an Indonesia that belongs to Indonesians.  But you also ultimately decided that freedomcannot mean replacing the strong hand of a colonizer with a strongman of your own. Of course, democracy is messy.  Not everyone likes the results of every election.  You gothrough your ups and downs.  But the journey is worthwhile, and it goes beyond casting aballot.  It takes strong institutions to check the power -- the concentration of power.  It takesopen markets to allow individuals to thrive.  It takes a free press and an independent justicesystem to root out abuses and excess, and to insist on accountability.  It takes open societyand active citizens to reject inequality and injustice. These are the forces that will propel Indonesia forward.  And it will require a refusal to toleratethe corruption that stands in the way of opportunity; a commitment to transparency thatgives every Indonesian a stake in their government; and a belief that the freedom ofIndonesians -- that Indonesians have fought for is what holds this great nation together.
  
 That is the message of the Indonesians who have advanced this democratic story -- fromthose who fought in the Battle of Surabaya 55 years ago today; to the students who marchedpeacefully for democracy in the 1990s; to leaders who have embraced the peaceful transitionof power in this young century.  Because ultimately, it will be the rights of citizens that willstitch together this remarkable Nusantara that stretches from Sabang to Merauke, aninsistence -- an insistence that every child born in this country should be treated equally,whether they come from Java or Aceh; from Bali or Papua.  That all Indonesians have equalrights. That effort extends to the example that Indonesia is now setting abroad.  Indonesia took theinitiative to establish the Bali Democracy Forum, an open forum for countries to share theirexperiences and best practices in fostering democracy.  Indonesia has also been at theforefront of pushing for more attention to human rights within ASEAN.  The nations ofSoutheast Asia must have the right to determine their own destiny, and the United States willstrongly support that right.  But the people of Southeast Asia must have the right todetermine their own destiny as well.  And that’s why we condemned elections in Burmarecently that were neither free nor fair.  That is why we are supporting your vibrant civilsociety in working with counterparts across this region.  Because there’s no reason whyrespect for human rights should stop at the border of any country. Hand in hand, that is what development and democracy are about -- the notion that certainvalues are universal.  Prosperity without freedom is just another form of poverty.  Becausethere are aspirations that human beings share -- the liberty of knowing that your leader isaccountable to you, and that you won’t be locked up for disagreeing with them; theopportunity to get an education and to be able to work with dignity; the freedom to practiceyour faith without fear or restriction.  Those are universal values that must be observedeverywhere.
Now, religion is the final topic that I want to address today, and -- like democracy anddevelopment -- it is fundamental to the Indonesian story. Like the other Asian nations that I’m visiting on this trip, Indonesia is steeped in spirituality --a place where people worship God in many different ways.  Along with this rich diversity, it isalso home to the world’s largest Muslim population -- a truth I came to know as a boy when Iheard the call to prayer across Jakarta. Just as individuals are not defined solely by their faith, Indonesia is defined by more than itsMuslim population.  But we also know that relations between the United States and Muslimcommunities have frayed over many years.  As President, I have made it a priority to begin torepair these relations.  As part of that effort, I went to Cairo last June, and I called for a newbeginning between the United States and Muslims around the world -- one that creates a pathfor us to move beyond our differences. 
  
I said then, and I will repeat now, that no single speech can eradicate years of mistrust.  But Ibelieved then, and I believe today, that we do have a choice.  We can choose to be defined byour differences, and give in to a future of suspicion and mistrust.  Or we can choose to do thehard work of forging common ground, and commit ourselves to the steady pursuit ofprogress.  And I can promise you -- no matter what setbacks may come, the United States iscommitted to human progress.  That is who we are.  That is what we’ve done.  And that iswhat we will do. Now, we know well the issues that have caused tensions for many years -- and these areissues that I addressed in Cairo.  In the 17 months that have passed since that speech, wehave made some progress, but we have much more work to do. Innocent civilians in America, in Indonesia and across the world are still targeted by violentextremism.  I made clear that America is not, and never will be, at war with Islam.  Instead,all of us must work together to defeat al Qaeda and its affiliates, who have no claim to beleaders of any religion -- certainly not a great, world religion like Islam.  But those who wantto build must not cede ground to terrorists who seek to destroy.  And this is not a task forAmerica alone.  Indeed, here in Indonesia, you’ve made progress in rooting out extremistsand combating such violence. In Afghanistan, we continue to work with a coalition of nations to build the capacity of theAfghan government to secure its future.  Our shared interest is in building peace in a war-tornland -- a peace that provides no safe haven for violent extremists, and that provide hope forthe Afghan people. Meanwhile, we’ve made progress on one of our core commitments -- our effort to end the warin Iraq.  Nearly 100,000 American troops have now left Iraq under my presidency.  Iraqishave taken full responsibility for their security.  And we will continue to support Iraq as itforms an inclusive government, and we will bring all of our troops home. In the Middle East, we have faced false starts and setbacks, but we’ve been persistent in ourpursuit of peace.  Israelis and Palestinians restarted direct talks, but enormous obstaclesremain.  There should be no illusion that peace and security will come easy.  But let there beno doubt:  America will spare no effort in working for the outcome that is just, and that is inthe interests of all the parties involved -- two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side inpeace and security.  That is our goal. The stakes are high in resolving all of these issues.  For our world has grown smaller, andwhile those forces that connect us have unleashed opportunity and great wealth, they alsoempower those who seek to derail progress.  One bomb in a marketplace can obliterate thebustle of daily commerce.  One whispered rumor can obscure the truth and set off violencebetween communities that once lived together in peace.  In an age of rapid change andcolliding cultures, what we share as human beings can sometimes be lost. 
  
But I believe that the history of both America and Indonesia should give us hope.  It is a storywritten into our national mottos.  In the United States, our motto is E pluribus unum -- out ofmany, one.  Bhinneka Tunggal Ika -- unity in diversity.  We are two nations, which havetraveled different paths.  Yet our nations show that hundreds of millions who hold differentbeliefs can be united in freedom under one flag.  And we are now building on that sharedhumanity -- through young people who will study in each other’s schools; through theentrepreneurs forging ties that can lead to greater prosperity; and through our embrace offundamental democratic values and human aspirations.    Before I came here, I visited Istiqlal mosque -- a place of worship that was still underconstruction when I lived in Jakarta.  And I admired its soaring minaret and its imposing domeand welcoming space.  But its name and history also speak to what makes Indonesia great. Istiqlal means independence, and its construction was in part a testament to the nation’sstruggle for freedom.  Moreover, this house of worship for many thousands of Muslims wasdesigned by a Christian architect. Such is Indonesia’s spirit.  Such is the message of Indonesia’s inclusive philosophy, Pancasila. Across an archipelago that contains some of God’s most beautiful creations, islands risingabove an ocean named for peace, people choose to worship God as they please.  Islamflourishes, but so do other faiths.  Development is strengthened by an emerging democracy. Ancient traditions endure, even as a rising power is on the move. That is not to say that Indonesia is without imperfections.  No country is.  But here we canfind the ability to bridge divides of race and region and religion -- by the ability to see yourselfin other people.  As a child of a different race who came here from a distant country, I foundthis spirit in the greeting that I received upon moving here:  Selamat Datang.  As a Christianvisiting a mosque on this visit, I found it in the words of a leader who was asked about myvisit and said, “Muslims are also allowed in churches.  We are all God’s followers.” That spark of the divine lives within each of us.  We cannot give in to doubt or cynicism ordespair.  The stories of Indonesia and America should make us optimistic, because it tells usthat history is on the side of human progress; that unity is more powerful than division; andthat the people of this world can live together in peace.  May our two nations, workingtogether, with faith and determination, share these truths with all mankind.
Sebagai penutup, saya mengucapkan kepada seluruh rakyat Indonesia: Terima kasih atas. Terima kasih.  Assalamualaikum. [In conclusion, I would like say thank you to all Indonesia:Thank you for your assistance. Thank you. Peace be upon you.]
Thank you.
