On behalf of the great state of Illinois, crossroads of a nation, Land of Lincoln, let me expressmy deepest gratitude for the privilege of addressing this convention.
Tonight is a particular honor for me because, let’s face it, my presence on this stage is prettyunlikely. My father was a foreign student, born and raised in a small village in Kenya. He grewup herding goats, went to school in a tin-roof shack. His father -- my grandfather -- was acook, a domestic servant to the British.
But my grandfather had larger dreams for his son. Through hard work and perseverance myfather got a scholarship to study in a magical place, America, that shone as a beacon offreedom and opportunity to so many who had come before.
While studying here, my father met my mother. She was born in a town on the other side ofthe world, in Kansas. Her father worked on oil rigs and farms through most of the Depression.The day after Pearl Harbor my grandfather signed up for duty; joined Patton’s army, marchedacross Europe. Back home, my grandmother raised a baby and went to work on a bomberassembly line. After the war, they studied on the G.I. Bill, bought a house through F.H.A., andlater moved west all the way to Hawaii in search of opportunity.
And they, too, had big dreams for their daughter. A common dream, born of two continents.

My parents shared not only an improbable love, they shared an abiding faith in thepossibilities of this nation. They would give me an African name, Barack, or ”blessed,”believing that in a tolerant America your name is no barrier to success. They imagined -- Theyimagined me going to the best schools in the land, even though they weren’t rich, because ina generous America you don’t have to be rich to achieve your potential.
They're both passed away now. And yet, I know that on this night they look down on me withgreat pride.
They stand here, and I stand here today, grateful for the diversity of my heritage, aware thatmy parents’ dreams live on in my two precious daughters. I stand here knowing that my storyis part of the larger American story, that I owe a debt to all of those who came before me,and that, in no other country on earth, is my story even possible.
Tonight, we gather to affirm the greatness of our Nation -- not because of the height of ourskyscrapers, or the power of our military, or the size of our economy. Our pride is based on avery simple premise, summed up in a declaration made over two hundred years ago: 
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they areendowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, that among these are Life,Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.
That is the true genius of America, a faith -- a faith in simple dreams, an insistence on smallmiracles; that we can tuck in our children at night and know that they are fed and clothed andsafe from harm; that we can say what we think, write what we think, without hearing asudden knock on the door; that we can have an idea and start our own business withoutpaying a bribe; that we can participate in the political process without fear of retribution, andthat our votes will be counted -- at least most of the time.
This year, in this election we are called to reaffirm our values and our commitments, to holdthem against a hard reality and see how we're measuring up to the legacy of our forbearersand the promise of future generations.
And fellow Americans, Democrats, Republicans, Independents, I say to you tonight: We havemore work to do --  more work to do for the workers I met in Galesburg, Illinois, who arelosing their union jobs at the Maytag plant that’s moving to Mexico, and now are having tocompete with their own children for jobs that pay seven bucks an hour; more to do for thefather that I met who was losing his job and choking back the tears, wondering how he wouldpay 4500 dollars a month for the drugs his son needs without the health benefits that hecounted on; more to do for the young woman in East St. Louis, and thousands more like her,who has the grades, has the drive, has the will, but doesn’t have the money to go to college.

Now, don’t get me wrong. The people I meet -- in small towns and big cities, in diners andoffice parks -- they don’t expect government to solve all their problems. They know they haveto work hard to get ahead,  and they want to. Go into the collar counties around Chicago, andpeople will tell you they don’t want their tax money wasted, by a welfare agency or by thePentagon. Go in -- Go into any inner city neighborhood, and folks will tell you thatgovernment alone can’t teach our kids to learn; they know that parents have to teach, thatchildren can’t achieve unless we raise their expectations and turn off the television sets anderadicate the slander that says a black youth with a book is acting white. They know thosethings.
People don’t expect -- People don't expect government to solve all their problems. But theysense, deep in their bones, that with just a slight change in priorities, we can make sure thatevery child in America has a decent shot at life, and that the doors of opportunity remain opento all.
They know we can do better. And they want that choice.
In this election, we offer that choice. Our Party has chosen a man to lead us who embodiesthe best this country has to offer. And that man is John Kerry.
John Kerry understands the ideals of community, faith, and service because they’ve definedhis life. From his heroic service to Vietnam, to his years as a prosecutor and lieutenantgovernor, through two decades in the United States Senate, he's devoted himself to thiscountry. Again and again, we’ve seen him make tough choices when easier ones wereavailable.
His values and his record affirm what is best in us. John Kerry believes in an America wherehard work is rewarded; so instead of offering tax breaks to companies shipping jobs overseas,he offers them to companies creating jobs here at home.
John Kerry believes in an America where all Americans can afford the same health coverageour politicians in Washington have for themselves.
John Kerry believes in energy independence, so we aren’t held hostage to the profits of oilcompanies, or the sabotage of foreign oil fields.
John Kerry believes in the Constitutional freedoms that have made our country the envy ofthe world, and he will never sacrifice our basic liberties, nor use faith as a wedge to divide us.
And John Kerry believes that in a dangerous world war must be an option sometimes, but itshould never be the first option.

You know, a while back -- awhile back I met a young man named Shamus in a V.F.W. Hall inEast Moline, Illinois. He was a good-looking kid -- six two, six three, clear eyed, with an easysmile. He told me he’d joined the Marines and was heading to Iraq the following week. And asI listened to him explain why he’d enlisted, the absolute faith he had in our country and itsleaders, his devotion to duty and service, I thought this young man was all that any of usmight ever hope for in a child.
But then I asked myself, "Are we serving Shamus as well as he is serving us?"
I thought of the 900 men and women -- sons and daughters, husbands and wives, friends andneighbors, who won’t be returning to their own hometowns. I thought of the families I’ve metwho were struggling to get by without a loved one’s full income, or whose loved ones hadreturned with a limb missing or nerves shattered, but still lacked long-term health benefitsbecause they were Reservists.
When we send our young men and women into harm’s way, we have a solemn obligation notto fudge the numbers or shade the truth about why they’re going, to care for their familieswhile they’re gone, to tend to the soldiers upon their return, and to never ever go to warwithout enough troops to win the war, secure the peace, and earn the respect of the world.
Now -- Now let me be clear. Let me be clear. We have real enemies in the world. Theseenemies must be found. They must be pursued. And they must be defeated. John Kerry knowsthis. And just as Lieutenant Kerry did not hesitate to risk his life to protect the men whoserved with him in Vietnam, President Kerry will not hesitate one moment to use our militarymight to keep America safe and secure.
John Kerry believes in America. And he knows that it’s not enough for just some of us toprosper -- for alongside our famous individualism, there’s another ingredient in the Americansaga,  a belief that we’re all connected as one people. If there is a child on the south side ofChicago who can’t read, that matters to me, even if it’s not my child. If there is a seniorcitizen somewhere who can’t pay for their prescription drugs, and having to choose betweenmedicine and the rent, that makes my life poorer, even if it’s not my grandparent. If there’san Arab American family being rounded up without benefit of an attorney or due process, thatthreatens my civil liberties.
It is that fundamental belief -- It is that fundamental belief: I am my brother’s keeper. I ammy sister’s keeper that makes this country work. It’s what allows us to pursue our individualdreams and yet still come together as one American family.
E pluribus unum: "Out of many, one."

Now even as we speak, there are those who are preparing to divide us -- the spin masters,the negative ad peddlers who embrace the politics of "anything goes." Well, I say to themtonight, there is not a liberal America and a conservative America -- there is the United Statesof America. There is not a Black America and a White America and Latino America and AsianAmerica -- there’s the United States of America.
The pundits, the pundits like to slice-and-dice our country into red states and blue states; redstates for Republicans, blue states for Democrats. But I’ve got news for them, too. Weworship an awesome God in the blue states, and we don’t like federal agents poking around inour libraries in the red states. We coach Little League in the blue states and yes, we’ve gotsome gay friends in the red states. There are patriots who opposed the war in Iraq and thereare patriots who supported the war in Iraq. We are one people, all of us pledging allegiance tothe stars and stripes, all of us defending the United States of America.
In the end -- In the end -- In the end, that’s what this election is about. Do we participate in apolitics of cynicism or do we participate in a politics of hope?
John Kerry calls on us to hope. John Edwards calls on us to hope.
I’m not talking about blind optimism here -- the almost willful ignorance that thinksunemployment will go away if we just don’t think about it, or the health care crisis will solveitself if we just ignore it. That’s not what I’m talking about. I’m talking about something moresubstantial. It’s the hope of slaves sitting around a fire singing freedom songs; the hope ofimmigrants setting out for distant shores; the hope of a young naval lieutenant bravelypatrolling the Mekong Delta; the hope of a millworker’s son who dares to defy the odds; thehope of a skinny kid with a funny name who believes that America has a place for him, too.
Hope -- Hope in the face of difficulty. Hope in the face of uncertainty. The audacity of hope!
In the end, that is God’s greatest gift to us, the bedrock of this nation. A belief in things notseen. A belief that there are better days ahead.
I believe that we can give our middle class relief and provide working families with a road toopportunity.
I believe we can provide jobs to the jobless, homes to the homeless, and reclaim youngpeople in cities across America from violence and despair.
I believe that we have a righteous wind at our backs and that as we stand on the crossroadsof history, we can make the right choices, and meet the challenges that face us.

America! Tonight, if you feel the same energy that I do, if you feel the same urgency that Ido, if you feel the same passion that I do, if you feel the same hopefulness that I do -- if wedo what we must do, then I have no doubt that all across the country, from Florida to Oregon,from Washington to Maine, the people will rise up in November, and John Kerry will be swornin as President, and John Edwards will be sworn in as Vice President, and this country willreclaim its promise, and out of this long political darkness a brighter day will come.
Thank you very much everybody.
God bless you.
Thank you.