Of all the privileges that come with serving as President of the United States, I have nonegreater than serving as Commander-in-Chief of the finest military that the world has everknown.  And of all the military decorations that a President and a nation can bestow, there isnone higher than the Medal of Honor.
Today is particularly special.  Since the end of the Vietnam War, the Medal of Honor has beenawarded nine times for conspicuous gallantry in an ongoing or recent conflict.  Sadly, ournation has been unable to present this decoration to the recipients themselves, because eachgave his life -- his last full measure of devotion -- for our country.  Indeed, as President, Ihave presented the Medal of Honor three times -- and each time to the families of a fallenhero.
Today, therefore, marks the first time in nearly 40 years that the recipient of the Medal ofHonor for an ongoing conflict has been able to come to the White House and accept thisrecognition in person.  It is my privilege to present our nation’s highest military decoration,the Medal of Honor, to a soldier as humble as he is heroic: Staff Sergeant Salvatore A. Giunta.
  
Now, I’m going to go off-script here for a second and just say I really like this guy.  I thinkanybody -- we all just get a sense of people and who they are, and when you meet Sal andyou meet his family, you are just absolutely convinced that this is what America is all about. And it just makes you proud.  And so this is a joyous occasion for me -- something that I havebeen looking forward to.
The Medal of Honor reflects the gratitude of an entire nation.  So we are also joined heretoday by several members of Congress, including both senators and several representativesfrom Staff Sergeant Giunta’s home state of Iowa.  We are also joined by leaders from acrossmy administration and the Department of Defense, including the Secretary of Defense, RobertGates; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mike Mullen.  Where’s Mike?  There he is,right there.  Army Secretary John McHugh; and Chief of Staff of the Army, General GeorgeCasey.
We are especially honored to be joined by Staff Sergeant Giunta’s fellow soldiers, histeammates and brothers from Battle Company, 2d of the 503d of the 173d Airborne Brigade;and several members of that rarest of fraternities that now welcomes him into its ranks -- theMedal of Honor Society.  Please give them a big round of applause.
We also welcome the friends and family who made Staff Sergeant Giunta into the man that heis, including his lovely wife, Jenny; and his parents, Steven and Rosemary; as well as hissiblings, who are here.  It was his mother, after all, who apparently taught him as a youngboy in small-town Iowa how to remove the screen from his bedroom window in case of fire. What she didn’t know was that by teaching Sal how to jump from his bedroom and sneakingoff in the dead of night, she was unleashing a future paratrooper -- who would one day fightin the rugged mountains of Afghanistan 7,000 miles away.
During the first of his two tours of duty in Afghanistan, Staff Sergeant Giunta was forced earlyon to come to terms with the loss of comrades and friends.  His team leader at the time gavehim a piece of advice:  “You just try -- you just got to try to do everything you can when it’syour time to do it.”  You’ve just got to try to do everything you can when it’s your time to doit.
Salvatore Giunta’s time came on October 25, 2007.  He was a Specialist then, just 22 yearsold.
Sal and his platoon were several days into a mission in the Korengal Valley -- the mostdangerous valley in northeast Afghanistan.  The moon was full.  The light it cast was enoughto travel by without using their night-vision goggles.  With heavy gear on their backs, and airsupport overhead, they made their way single file down a rocky ridge crest, along terrain sosteep that sliding was sometimes easier than walking.
  
They hadn’t traveled a quarter mile before the silence was shattered.  It was an ambush, soclose that the cracks of the guns and the whizz of the bullets were simultaneous.  Tracer firehammered the ridge at hundreds of rounds per minute -- “more,” Sal said later, “than thestars in the sky.”
The Apache gunships above saw it all, but couldn’t engage with the enemy so close to oursoldiers.  The next platoon heard the shooting, but were too far away to join the fight in time.
And the two lead men were hit by enemy fire and knocked down instantly.  When the thirdwas struck in the helmet and fell to the ground, Sal charged headlong into the wall of bulletsto pull him to safety behind what little cover there was.  As he did, Sal was hit twice -- oneround slamming into his body armor, the other shattering a weapon slung across his back.
They were pinned down, and two wounded Americans still lay up ahead.  So Sal and hiscomrades regrouped and counterattacked.  They threw grenades, using the explosions ascover to run forward, shooting at the muzzle flashes still erupting from the trees.  Then theydid it again.  And again.  Throwing grenades, charging ahead.  Finally, they reached one oftheir men.  He’d been shot twice in the leg, but he had kept returning fire until his gunjammed.
As another soldier tended to his wounds, Sal sprinted ahead, at every step meeting relentlessenemy fire with his own.  He crested a hill alone, with no cover but the dust kicked up by thestorm of bullets still biting into the ground.  There, he saw a chilling sight:  the silhouettes oftwo insurgents carrying the other wounded American away -- who happened to be one of Sal’sbest friends.  Sal never broke stride.  He leapt forward.  He took aim.  He killed one of theinsurgents and wounded the other, who ran off.
Sal found his friend alive, but badly wounded.  Sal had saved him from the enemy -- now hehad to try to save his life.  Even as bullets impacted all around him, Sal grabbed his friend bythe vest and dragged him to cover.  For nearly half an hour, Sal worked to stop the bleedingand help his friend breathe until the MEDEVAC arrived to lift the wounded from the ridge. American gunships worked to clear the enemy from the hills.  And with the battle over, FirstPlatoon picked up their gear and resumed their march through the valley.  They continuedtheir mission.
It had been as intense and violent a firefight as any soldier will experience.  By the time it wasfinished, every member of First Platoon had shrapnel or a bullet hole in their gear.  Five werewounded.  And two gave their lives:  Sal’s friend, Sergeant Joshua C. Brennan, and theplatoon medic, Specialist Hugo V. Mendoza.
Now, the parents of Joshua and Hugo are here today.  And I know that there are no wordsthat, even three years later, can ease the ache in your hearts or repay the debt that Americaowes to you.  But on behalf of a grateful nation, let me express profound thanks to your sons’service and their sacrifice.  And could the parents of Joshua and Hugo please stand briefly? 
  
Now, I already mentioned I like this guy, Sal.  And as I found out myself when I first spokewith him on the phone and when we met in the Oval Office today, he is a low-key guy, ahumble guy, and he doesn’t seek the limelight.  And he’ll tell you that he didn’t do anythingspecial; that he was just doing his job; that any of his brothers in the unit would do the samething.  In fact, he just lived up to what his team leader instructed him to do years before: “You do everything you can.”
Staff Sergeant Giunta, repeatedly and without hesitation, you charged forward throughextreme enemy fire, embodying the warrior ethos that says, “I will never leave a fallencomrade.”  Your actions disrupted a devastating ambush before it could claim more lives. Your courage prevented the capture of an American soldier and brought that soldier back tohis family.  You may believe that you don’t deserve this honor, but it was your fellow soldierswho recommended you for it.  In fact, your commander specifically said in hisrecommendation that you lived up to the standards of the most decorated American soldier ofWorld War II, Audie Murphy, who famously repelled an overwhelming enemy attack by himselffor one simple reason:  “They were killing my friends.”
That’s why Salvatore Giunta risked his life for his fellow soldiers -- because they would risktheir lives for him.  That’s what fueled his bravery -- not just the urgent impulse to have theirbacks, but the absolute confidence that they had his.  One of them, Sal has said -- of theseyoung men that he was with, he said, “They are just as much of me as I am.”  They are justas much of me as I am.
So I would ask Sal’s team, all of Battle Company who were with him that day, to please standand be recognized as well. Gentlemen, thank you for your service.  We’re all in your debt. And I’m proud to be your Commander-in-Chief.
These are the soldiers of our Armed Forces.  Highly trained.  Battle-hardened.  Each withspecialized roles and responsibilities, but all with one thing in common -- they volunteered.  Inan era when it’s never been more tempting to chase personal ambition or narrow self-interest,they chose the opposite.  They felt a tug; they answered a call; they said, “I’ll go.”  And forthe better part of a decade, they have endured tour after tour in distant and difficult places;they have protected us from danger; they have given others the opportunity to earn a betterand more secure life.
They are the courageous men and women serving in Afghanistan even as we speak.  Theykeep clear focus on their mission:  to deny safe haven for terrorists who would attack ourcountry, to break the back of the Taliban insurgency, to build the Afghans’ capacity to defendthemselves.  They possess the steely resolve to see their mission through.  They are made ofthe same strong stuff as the troops in this room, and I am absolutely confident that they willcontinue to succeed in the missions that we give them, in Afghanistan and beyond.
  
After all, our brave servicemen and women and their families have done everything they’vebeen asked to do.  They have been everything that we have asked them to be.  “If I am ahero,” Sal has said, “then every man who stands around me, every woman in the military,every person who defends this country is.”  And he’s right.
This medal today is a testament to his uncommon valor, but also to the parents and thecommunity that raised him; the military that trained him; and all the men and women whoserved by his side.
All of them deserve our enduring thanks and gratitude. They represent a small fraction of theAmerican population, but they and the families who await their safe return carry far more thantheir fair share of our burden.  They fight halfway around the globe, but they do it in hopesthat our children and our grandchildren won’t have to.
They are the very best part of us.  They are our friends, our family, our neighbors, ourclassmates, our coworkers.  They are why our banner still waves, our founding principles stillshine, and our country -- the United States of America -- still stands as a force for good allover the world.
So, please join me in welcoming Staff Sergeant Salvatore A. Giunta for the reading of thecitation.
MILITARY AIDE:  The President of the United States of America, authorized by act ofCongress, March 3, 1863, has awarded, in the name of Congress, the Medal of Honorto then Specialist Salvatore A. Giunta, United States Army.
Specialist Salvatore A. Giunta distinguished himself conspicuously by gallantry andintrepidity, at the risk of his life, above and beyond the call of duty, in action, with anarmed enemy in the Korengal Valley, Afghanistan, on October 25, 2007.
While conducting a patrol as team leader, with Company B, 2d Battalion Airborne, 503dInfantry Regiment, Specialist Giunta and his team were navigating through harshterrain when they were ambushed by a well-armed and well-coordinated insurgentforce.
While under heavy enemy fire, Specialist Giunta immediately sprinted towards coverand engaged the enemy.  Seeing that his squad leader had fallen, and believing thathe had been injured, Specialist Giunta exposed himself to withering enemy fire andraced towards his squad leader, helped him to cover and administered medical aid.
While administering first aid, enemy fire struck Special Giunta’s body armor and hissecondary weapon.  Without regard to the ongoing fire, Specialist Giunta engaged theenemy before prepping and throwing grenades, using the explosions for cover in orderto conceal his position.
  
Attempting to reach additional wounded fellow soldiers who were separated from thesquad, Specialist Giunta and his team encountered a barrage of enemy fire that forcedthem to the ground.  The team continued forward, and upon reaching the woundedsoldiers, Specialist Giunta realized that another soldier was still separated from theelement.  Specialist Giunta then advanced forward on his own initiative.  As he crestedthe top of a hill, he observed two insurgents carrying away an American soldier.  Heimmediately engaged the enemy, killing one and wounding the other.  Upon reachingthe wounded soldier, he began to provide medical aid, as his squad caught up andprovided security.
Specialist Giunta’s unwavering courage, selflessness and decisive leadership whileunder extreme enemy fire were integral to his platoon’s ability to defeat an enemyambush and recover a fellow American soldier from the enemy.
Specialist Salvatore A. Giunta’s extraordinary heroism and selflessness above andbeyond the call of duty are in keeping with the highest traditions of military service andreflect great credit upon himself, Company B, 2d Battalion Airborne, 503d InfantryRegiment and the United States Army.
