Good afternoon.  Thank you, President Sarkozy, Prime Minister Brown, Prime Minister Harper,and Prince Charles for being here today.  Thank you to our Secretary of Veterans Affairs,General Eric Shinseki, for making the trip out here to join us.  Thanks also to SusanEisenhower, whose grandfather began this mission 65 years ago with a simple charge: "Ok,let's go."  And to a World War II veteran who returned home from this war to serve a proudand distinguished career as a United States Senator and a national leader:  Bob Dole.
I'm not the first American President to come and mark this anniversary, and I likely will not bethe last.  This is an event that has long brought to this coast both heads of state and gratefulcitizens; veterans and their loved ones; the liberated and their liberators.  It's been writtenabout and spoken of and depicted in countless books and films and speeches.  And long afterour time on this Earth has passed, one word will still bring forth the pride and awe of men andwomen who will never meet the heroes who sit before us:  D-Day.
Why is this?  Of all the battles in all the wars across the span of human history, why does thisday hold such a revered place in our memory?  What is it about the struggle that took placeon the sands a few short steps from here that brings us back to remember year after yearafter year?
Part of it, I think, is the size of the odds that weighed against success.  For three centuries, noinvader had ever been able to cross the English Channel into Normandy.  And it had neverbeen more difficult than in 1944.

That was the year that Hitler ordered his top field marshal to fortify the Atlantic Wall against aseaborne invasion.  From the tip of Norway to southern France, the Nazis lined steep cliffswith machine guns and artillery.  Low-lying areas were flooded to block passage.  Sharpenedpoles awaited paratroopers.  Mines were laid on the beaches and beneath the water.  And bythe time of the invasion, half a million Germans waited for the Allies along the coast betweenHolland and northern France.
At dawn on June 6th, the Allies came.  The best chance for victory had been for the BritishRoyal Air Corps to take out the guns on the cliffs while airborne divisions parachuted behindenemy lines.  But all did not go according to plan.  Paratroopers landed miles from their mark,while the fog and clouds prevented Allied planes from destroying the guns on the cliffs.  Sowhen the ships landed here at Omaha, an unimaginable hell rained down on the men inside. Many never made it out of the boats.
And yet, despite all of this, one by one, the Allied forces made their way to shore -- here, andat Utah and Juno; Gold and Sword.  They were American, British, and Canadian.  Soon, theparatroopers found each other and fought their way back.  The Rangers scaled the cliffs.  Andby the end of the day, against all odds, the ground on which we stand was free once more.
The sheer improbability of this victory is part of what makes D-Day so memorable.  It alsoarises from the clarity of purpose with which this war was waged.
We live in a world of competing beliefs and claims about what is true.  It's a world of variedreligions and cultures and forms of government.  In such a world, it's all too rare for astruggle to emerge that speaks to something universal about humanity.
The Second World War did that.  No man who shed blood or lost a brother would say that waris good.  But all know that this war was essential.  For what we faced in Nazi totalitarianismwas not just a battle of competing interests.  It was a competing vision of humanity.  Naziideology sought to subjugate and humiliate and exterminate.  It perpetrated murder on amassive scale, fueled by a hatred of those who were deemed different and therefore inferior. It was evil.
The nations that joined together to defeat Hitler's Reich were not perfect.  They had madetheir share of mistakes, had not always agreed with one another on every issue.  Butwhatever God we prayed to, whatever our differences, we knew that the evil we faced had tobe stopped.  Citizens of all faiths and of no faith came to believe that we could not remain asbystanders to the savage perpetration of death and destruction.  And so we joined and sentour sons to fight and often die so that men and women they never met might know what it isto be free.
In America, it was an endeavor that inspired a nation to action.  A President who asked hiscountry to pray on D-Day also asked its citizens to serve and sacrifice to make the invasionpossible.

On farms and in factories, millions of men and women worked three shifts a day, month aftermonth, year after year.  Trucks and tanks came from plants in Michigan and Indiana, NewYork and Illinois.  Bombers and fighter planes rolled off assembly lines in Ohio and Kansas,where my grandmother did her part as an inspector.  Shipyards on both coasts produced thelargest fleet in history, including the landing craft from New Orleans that eventually made ithere to Omaha.
But despite all the years of planning and preparation, despite the inspiration of our leaders,the skill of our generals, the strength of our firepower and the unyielding support from ourhome front, the outcome of the entire struggle would ultimately rest on the success of oneday in June.
Lyndon Johnson once said that there are certain moments when "¼history and fate meet at asingle time in a single place to shape a turning point in man's unending search for freedom."
D-Day was such a moment.  One newspaper noted that "we have come to the hour for whichwe were born."  Had the Allies failed here, Hitler's occupation of this continent might havecontinued indefinitely.  Instead, victory here secured a foothold in France.  It opened a path toBerlin.  It made possible the achievements that followed the liberation of Europe:  theMarshall Plan, the NATO alliance, the shared prosperity and security that flowed from each.
It was unknowable then, but so much of the progress that would define the 20th century, onboth sides of the Atlantic, came down to the battle for a slice of beach only six miles long andtwo miles wide.
More particularly, it came down to the men who landed here -- those who now rest in thisplace for eternity, and those who are with us here today.  Perhaps more than any otherreason, you, the veterans of that landing, are why we still remember what happened on D-
Day.  You're why we keep coming back.
For you remind us that in the end, human destiny is not determined by forces beyond ourcontrol.  You remind us that our future is not shaped by mere chance or circumstance.  Ourhistory has always been the sum total of the choices made and the actions taken by eachindividual man and woman.  It has always been up to us.
You could have done what Hitler believed you would do when you arrived here.  In the face ofa merciless assault from these cliffs, you could have idled the boats offshore.  Amid a barrageof tracer bullets that lit the night sky, you could have stayed in those planes.  You could havehid in the hedgerows or waited behind the seawall.  You could have done only what wasnecessary to ensure your own survival.
But that's not what you did.  That's not the story you told on D-Day.  Your story was writtenby men like Zane Schlemmer of the 82nd Airborne, who parachuted into a dark marsh, farfrom his objective and his men.

Lost and alone, he still managed to fight his way through the gunfire and help liberate thetown in which he landed -- a town where a street now bears his name.
It's a story written by men like Anthony Ruggiero, an Army Ranger who saw half the men onhis landing craft drown when it was hit by shellfire just a thousand yards off this beach.  Hespent three hours in freezing water, and was one of only 90 Rangers to survive out of the 225who were sent to scale the cliffs.
And it's a story written by so many who are no longer with us, like Carlton Barrett.  PrivateBarrett was only supposed to serve as a guide for the 1st Infantry Division, but he insteadbecame one of its heroes.  After wading ashore in neck-deep water, he returned to the wateragain and again and again to save his wounded and drowning comrades.  And under theheaviest possible enemy fire, he carried them to safety.  He carried them in his own arms.
This is the story of the Allied victory.  It's the legend of units like Easy Company and the All-
American 82nd.  It's the tale of the British people, whose courage during the Blitz forced Hitlerto call off the invasion of England; the Canadians, who came even though they were neverattacked; the Russians, who sustained some of the war's heaviest casualties on the Easternfront; and all those French men and women who would rather have died resisting tyrannythan lived within its grasp.
It is the memories that have been passed on to so many of us about the service or sacrifice ofa friend or relative.  For me, it is my grandfather, Stanley Dunham, who arrived on this beachsix weeks after D-Day and marched across Europe in Patton's Army.  And it is my great unclewho was part of the first American division to reach and liberate a Nazi concentration camp. His name is Charles Payne, and I'm so proud that he's with us here today.
I know this trip doesn't get any easier as the years pass, but for those of you who make it,there's nothing that could keep you away.  One such veteran, a man named Jim Norene, wasa member of the 502nd Parachute Infantry Division of the 101st Airborne.  Last night, aftervisiting this cemetery for one last time, he passed away in his sleep.  Jim was gravely ill whenhe left his home, and he knew that he might not return.  But just as he did 65 years ago, hecame anyway.  May he now rest in peace with the boys he once bled with, and may his familyalways find solace in the heroism he showed here.
In the end, Jim Norene came back to Normandy for the same reason we all come back.  Hecame for the reason articulated by Howard Huebner, another former paratrooper who is herewith us today.  When asked why he made the trip, Howard said, "It's important that we tellour stories.  It doesn't have to be something big¼just a little story about what happened -- sopeople don't forget."
So people don't forget.

Friends and veterans, we cannot forget.  What we must not forget is that D-Day was a timeand a place where the bravery and the selflessness of a few was able to change the course ofan entire century.  At an hour of maximum danger, amid the bleakest of circumstances, menwho thought themselves ordinary found within themselves the ability to do somethingextraordinary.  They fought for their moms and sweethearts back home, for the fellowwarriors they came to know as brothers.  And they fought out of a simple sense of duty -- aduty sustained by the same ideals for which their countrymen had once fought and bled forover two centuries.
That is the story of Normandy -- but also the story of America; of the Minutemen whogathered on a green in Lexington; of the Union boys from Maine who repelled a charge atGettysburg; of the men who gave their last full measure of devotion at Inchon and Khe San;of all the young men and women whose valor and goodness still carry forward this legacy ofservice and sacrifice.  It's a story that has never come easy, but one that always gives ushope.  For as we face down the hardships and struggles of our time, and arrive at that hourfor which we were born, we cannot help but draw strength from those moments in historywhen the best among us were somehow able to swallow their fears and secure a beachheadon an unforgiving shore.
To those men who achieved that victory 65 years ago, we thank you for your service.
May God bless you, and may God bless the memory of all those who rest here.