Thank you. Please be seated.
To all the families who loved so deeply the miners we’ve lost; to all who called them friends,worked alongside them in the mines, or knew them as neighbors, in Montcoal and Naoma, orWhitesville, in the Coal River Valley and across West Virginia -– let me begin by saying thatwe have been mourning with you throughout these difficult days. Our hearts have been achingwith you. We keep our thoughts with the survivors who are recovering and resting at thehospital and at the homes. We're thankful for the rescue teams. But our hearts ache alongsideyou.
We’re here to memorialize 29 Americans: Carl Acord. Jason Atkins. Christopher Bell. GregorySteven Brock. Kenneth Allan Chapman. Robert Clark. Charles Timothy Davis. Cory Davis.Michael Lee Elswick. William I. Griffith. Steven Harrah. Edward Dean Jones. Richard K. Lane.William Roosevelt Lynch. Nicholas Darrell McCroskey. Joe Marcum. Ronald Lee Maynor. JamesE. Mooney. Adam Keith Morgan. Rex L. Mullins. Joshua S. Napper. Howard D. Payne. DillardEarl Persinger. Joel R. Price. Deward Scott. Gary Quarles. Grover Dale Skeens. BennyWillingham. And Ricky Workman.
Nothing I, or the Vice President, or the Governor, none of the speakers here today, nothingwe say can fill the hole they leave in your hearts, or the absence that they leave in your lives.If any comfort can be found, it can, perhaps, be found by seeking the face of God -- whoquiets our troubled minds, a God who mends our broken hearts, a God who eases ourmourning souls.
  
Even as we mourn 29 lives lost, we also remember 29 lives lived. Up at 4:30 a.m., 5:00 in themorning at the latest, they began their day, as they worked, in darkness. In coveralls andhard-toe boots, a hardhat over their heads, they would sit quietly for their hour-long journey,five miles into a mountain, the only light the lamp on their caps, or the glow from the mantripthey rode in.
Day after day, they would burrow into the coal, the fruits of their labor, what so often we takefor granted: the electricity that lights up a convention center; that lights up our church or ourhome, our school, our office; the energy that powers our country; the energy that powers theworld.
And most days they’d emerge from the dark mine, squinting at the light. Most days, they’demerge, sweaty and dirty and dusted from coal. Most days, they’d come home. But not thatday.
These men -- these husbands, fathers, grandfathers, brothers sons, uncles, nephews -- theydid not take on their job unaware of the perils. Some of them had already been injured; someof them had seen a friend get hurt. So they understood there were risks. And their familiesdid, too. They knew their kids would say a prayer at night before they left. They knew theirwives would wait for a call when their shift ended saying everything was okay. They knewtheir parents felt a pang of fear every time a breaking news alert came on, or the radio cut in.
But they left for the mines anyway -- some, having waited all their lives to be miners; havinglonged to follow in the footsteps of their fathers and their grandfathers. And yet, none of themdid it for themselves alone.
All that hard work, all that hardship, all the time spent underground, it was all for the families.It was all for you. For a car in the driveway, a roof overhead. For a chance to give their kidsopportunities that they would never know, and enjoy retirement with their spouses. It was allin the hopes of something better. And so these miners lived -- as they died -- in pursuit of theAmerican Dream.
There, in the mines, for their families, they became a family themselves -- sharing birthdays,relaxing together, watching Mountaineers football or basketball together, spending days offtogether, hunting or fishing. They may not have always loved what they did, said a sister, butthey loved doing it together. They loved doing it as a family. They loved doing it as acommunity.
That’s a spirit that’s reflected in a song that almost every American knows. But it’s a songmost people, I think, would be surprised was actually written by a coal miner’s son about thistown, Beckley, about the people of West Virginia. It’s the song, Lean on Me -- an anthem offriendship, but also an anthem of community, of coming together.
  
That community was revealed for all to see in the minutes, and hours, and days after thetragedy. Rescuers, risking their own safety, scouring narrow tunnels saturated with methaneand carbon monoxide, hoping against hope they might find a survivor. Friends keeping porchlights on in a nightly vigil; hanging up homemade signs that read, "Pray for our miners, andtheir families." Neighbors consoling each other, and supporting each other and leaning on oneanother.
I’ve seen it, the strength of that community. In the days that followed the disaster, emailsand letters poured into the White House. Postmarked from different places across the country,they often began the same way: "I am proud to be from a family of miners." "I am the son ofa coal miner." "I am proud to be a coal miner’s daughter." They were always proud, and theyasked me to keep our miners in my thoughts, in my prayers. Never forget, they say, minerskeep America’s lights on. And then in these letters, they make a simple plea: Don’t let thishappen again. Don't let this happen again.
How can we fail them? How can a nation that relies on its miners not do everything in itspower to protect them? How can we let anyone in this country put their lives at risk by simplyshowing up to work; by simply pursuing the American Dream?
We cannot bring back the 29 men we lost. They are with the Lord now. Our task, here onEarth, is to save lives from being lost in another such tragedy; to do what must do,individually and collectively, to assure safe conditions underground -- to treat our miners likethey treat each other -- like a family. Because we are all family and we are all Americans. Andwe have to lean on one another, and look out for one another, and love one another, and prayfor one another. 
There's a psalm that comes to mind today -- a psalm that comes to mind, a psalm we oftenturn to in times of heartache: 
Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, forYou are with me; your rod and your staff, they comfort me.
God bless our miners.
God bless their families.
God bless West Virginia.
And God bless the United States of America.
