Mr. Vice President, Madam Speaker, Mr. Prime Minister, members of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, andmost of all, the people of India.
I thank you for the great honor of addressing the representatives of more than one billion Indians and theworld’s largest democracy.  I bring the greetings and friendship of the world’s oldest democracy -- the UnitedStates of America, including nearly three million proud and patriotic Indian-Americans.
Over the past three days, my wife Michelle and I have experienced the -- and dynamism of India and itspeople -- from the majesty of Humayun’s Tomb to the advanced technologies that are empowering farmersand women who are the backbone of Indian society; from the Diwali celebrations with schoolchildren to theinnovators who are fueling India’s economic rise; from the university students who will chart India’s future, toyou -- leaders who helped to bring India to this moment of extraordinary promise.
At every stop, we have been welcomed with the hospitality for which Indians have always been known.  So,to you and the people of India, on behalf of me, Michelle and the American people, please accept mydeepest thanks.  Bahoot dhanyavad.
Now, I am not the first American President to visit India.  Nor will I be the last.  But I am proud to visit Indiaso early in my presidency.  It’s no coincidence that India is my first stop on a visit to Asia, or that this hasbeen my longest visit to another country since becoming President.  For in Asia and around the world, Indiais not simply emerging; India has emerged.
And it is my firm belief that the relationship between the United States and India -- bound by our sharedinterests and our shared values -- will be one of the defining partnerships of the 21st century.  This is thepartnership I’ve come here to build. This is the vision that our nations can realize together.
  
My confidence in our shared future is grounded in my respect for India’s treasured past -- a civilization that’sbeen shaping the world for thousands of years.  Indians unlocked the intricacies of the human body and thevastness of our universe.  It’s no exaggeration to say that our Information Age is rooted in Indian innovations-- including the number zero.
Of course, India not only opened our minds, she expanded our moral imaginations -- with religious texts thatstill summon the faithful to lives of dignity and discipline, with poets who imagined a future “where the mindis without fear and the head is held high” -- and with a man whose message of love and justice endures --the father of your nation, Mahatma Gandhi.
For me and Michelle, this visit has, therefore, held special meaning.  See, throughout my life, including mywork as a young man on behalf of the urban poor, I’ve always found inspiration in the life of Gandhiji and hissimple and profound lesson to be the change we seek in the world.  And just as he summoned Indians toseek their destiny, he influenced champions of equality in my own country, including a young preachernamed Martin Luther King.  After making his pilgrimage to India a half-century ago, Dr. King called Gandhi’sphilosophy of non-violent resistance “the only logical and moral approach” in the struggle for justice andprogress.
So we were honored to visit the residence where Gandhi and King both stayed -- Mani Bhavan.  And wewere humbled to pay our respects at Raj Ghat.  And I am mindful that I might not be standing before youtoday, as President of the United States, had it not been for Gandhi and the message he shared andinspired  with America and the world.
An ancient civilization of science and innovation; a fundamental faith in human progress -- this is the sturdyfoundation upon which you have built ever since that stroke of midnight when the tricolor was raised over afree and independent India.  And despite the skeptics who said this country was simply too poor, or too vast,or too diverse to succeed, you surmounted overwhelming odds and became a model to the world.
Instead of slipping into starvation, you launched a Green Revolution that fed millions.  Instead of becomingdependent on commodities and exports, you invested in science and technology and in your greatestresource -- the Indian people.  And the world sees the results, from the supercomputers you build to theIndian flag that you put on the moon.
Instead of resisting the global economy, you became one of its engines -- reforming the licensing raj andunleashing an economic marvel that has lifted tens of millions of people from poverty and created one of theworld’s largest middle classes.
Instead of succumbing to division, you have shown that the strength of India -- the very idea of India -- is itsembrace of all colors, all castes, all creeds.  It’s the diversity represented in this chamber today.  It’s therichness of faiths celebrated by a visitor to my hometown of Chicago more than a century ago -- therenowned Swami Vivekananda.  He said that, “holiness, purity and charity are not the exclusive possessionsof any church in the world, and that every system has produced men and women of the most exaltedcharacter.”
  
And instead of being lured by the false notion that progress must come at the expense of freedom, you builtthe institutions upon which true democracy depends -- free and fair elections, which enable citizens tochoose their own leaders without recourse to arms -- an independent judiciary and the rule of law, whichallows people to address their grievances; and a thriving free press and vibrant civil society which allowsevery voice to be heard.  This year, as India marks 60 years with a strong and democratic constitution, thelesson is clear:  India has succeeded, not in spite of democracy; India has succeeded because ofdemocracy.
Now, just as India has changed, so, too, has the relationship between our two nations.  In the decades afterindependence, India advanced its interests as a proud leader of the nonaligned movement.  Yet, too often,the United States and India found ourselves on opposite sides of a North-`South divide, estranged by a longCold War.  Those days are over.
Here in India, two successive governments led by different parties have recognized that deeper partnershipwith America is both natural and necessary.  And in the United States, both of my predecessors -- one aDemocrat, one a Republican -- worked to bring us closer, leading to increased trade and a landmark civilnuclear agreement.
So since that time, people in both our countries have asked: What’s next?  How can we build on thisprogress and realize the full potential of our partnership?  That’s what I want to address today -- the futurethat the United States seeks in an interconnected world, and why I believe that India is indispensable to thisvision; how we can forge a truly global partnership -- not just in one or two areas, but across many; not justfor our mutual benefit, but for the benefit of the world.
Of course, only Indians can determine India’s national interests and how to advance them on the worldstage.  But I stand before you today because I am convinced that the interests of the United States -- andthe interests we share with India -- are best advanced in partnership.  I believe that.
The United States seeks security -- the security of our country, our allies and partners.  We seek prosperity -
- a strong and growing economy in an open international economic system.  We seek respect for universalvalues.  And we seek a just and sustainable international order that promotes peace and security bymeeting global challenges through stronger global cooperation.
Now, to advance these interests, I have committed the United States to comprehensive engagement withthe world, based on mutual interest and mutual respect.  And a central pillar of this engagement is forgingdeeper cooperation with 21st century centers of influence -- and that must necessarily include India.
Now, India is not the only emerging power in the world.  But relationships between our countries is unique. For we are two strong democracies whose constitutions begin with the same revolutionary words -- thesame revolutionary words -- “We the people.”  We are two great republics dedicated to the liberty and justiceand equality of all people.  And we are two free market economies where people have the freedom topursue ideas and innovation that can change the world.  And that’s why I believe that India and America areindispensable partners in meeting the challenges of our time.
  
Since taking office, I’ve, therefore, made our relationship a priority.  I was proud to welcome Prime MinisterSingh for the first official state visit of my presidency.  For the first time ever, our governments are workingtogether across the whole range of common challenges that we face.  Now, let me say it as clearly as I can: The United States not only welcomes India as a rising global power, we fervently support it, and we haveworked to help make it a reality.
Together with our partners, we have made the G20 the premier forum for international economiccooperation, bringing more voices to the table of global economic decision-making, and that has includedIndia.  We’ve increased the role of emerging economies like India at international financial institutions.  Wevalued India’s important role at Copenhagen, where, for the first time, all major economies committed totake action to confront climate change -- and to stand by those actions.  We salute India’s long history as aleading contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions.  And we welcome India as it prepares to takeits seat on the United Nations Security Council.
In short, with India assuming its rightful place in the world, we have an historic opportunity to make therelationship between our two countries a defining partnership of the century ahead.  And I believe we can doso by working together in three important areas.
First, as global partners we can promote prosperity in both our countries.  Together, we can create the high-
tech, high-wage jobs of the future.  With my visit, we are now ready to begin implementing our civil nuclearagreement.  This will help meet India’s growing energy needs and create thousands of jobs in both of ourcountries.
We need to forge partnerships in high-tech sectors like defense and civil space.  So we’ve removed Indianorganizations from our so-called “entity list.”  And we’ll work to remove -- and reform our controls onexports.  Both of these steps will ensure that Indian companies seeking high-tech trade and technologiesfrom America are treated the same as our very closest allies and partners.
We can pursue joint research and development to create green jobs; give India more access to cleaner,affordable energy; meet the commitments we made at Copenhagen; and show the possibilities of low-
carbon growth.
And together, we can resist the protectionism that stifles growth and innovation.  The United States remains-- and will continue to remain -- one of the most open economies in the world.  And by opening markets andreducing barriers to foreign investment, India can realize its full economic potential as well.  As G20partners, we can make sure the global economic recovery is strong and is durable.  And we can keepstriving for a Doha Round that is ambitious and is balanced -- with the courage to make the compromisesthat are necessary so global trade works for all economies.
Together, we can strengthen agriculture.  Cooperation between Indian and American researchers andscientists sparked the Green Revolution.  Today, India is a leader in using technology to empower farmers,like those I met yesterday who get free updates on market and weather conditions on their cell phones.  Andthe United States is a leader in agricultural productivity and research.  Now, as farmers and rural areas facethe effects of climate change and drought, we’ll work together to spark a second, more sustainableEvergreen Revolution.
  
Together, we’re improving Indian weather forecasting systems before the next monsoon season.  We aim tohelp millions of Indian farmers -- farming households save water and increase productivity, improve foodprocessing so crops don’t spoil on the way to market, and enhance climate and crop forecasting to avoidlosses that cripple communities and drive up food prices.
And as part of our food security initiative, we’re going to share India’s expertise with farmers in Africa.  Andthis is an indication of India’s rise -- that we can now export hard-earned expertise to countries that seeIndia as a model for agricultural development.  It’s another powerful example of how American and Indianpartnership can address an urgent global challenge.
Because the wealth of a nation also depends on the health of its people, we’ll continue to support India’seffort against diseases like tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, and as global partners, we’ll work to improve globalhealth by preventing the spread of pandemic flu.  And because knowledge is the currency of the 21stcentury, we will increase exchanges between our students, our colleges and our universities, which areamong the best in the world.
As we work to advance our shared prosperity, we can partner to address a second priority -- and that is ourshared security. In Mumbai, I met with the courageous families and survivors of that barbaric attack.  Andhere in Parliament, which was itself targeted because of the democracy it represents, we honor the memoryof all those who have been taken from us, including American citizens on 26/11 and Indian citizens on 9/11.
This is the bond that we share.  It’s why we insist that nothing ever justifies the slaughter of innocent men,women and children.  It’s why we’re working together, more closely than ever, to prevent terrorist attacksand to deepen our cooperation even further.  And it’s why, as strong and resilient societies, we refuse to livein fear.  We will not sacrifice the values and rule of law that defines us, and we will never waver in thedefense of our people.
America’s fight against al Qaeda and its terrorist affiliates is why we persevere in Afghanistan, where majordevelopment assistance from India has improved the lives of the Afghan people.  We’re making progress inour mission to break the Taliban’s momentum and to train Afghan forces so they can take the lead for theirsecurity.  And while I have made it clear that American forces will begin the transition to Afghanresponsibility next summer, I’ve also made it clear that America’s commitment to the Afghan people willendure.  The United States will not abandon the people of Afghanistan -- or the region -- to violentextremists who threaten us all.
Our strategy to disrupt and dismantle and defeat al Qaeda and its affiliates has to succeed on both sides ofthe border.  And that’s why we have worked with the Pakistani government to address the threat of terroristnetworks in the border region. The Pakistani government increasingly recognizes that these networks arenot just a threat outside of Pakistan -- they are a threat to the Pakistani people, as well.  They’ve sufferedgreatly at the hands of violent extremists over the last several years.
And we’ll continue to insist to Pakistan's leaders that terrorist safe havens within their borders areunacceptable, and that terrorists behind the Mumbai attacks must be brought to justice.  We must alsorecognize that all of us have an interest in both an Afghanistan and a Pakistan that is stable and prosperousand democratic -- and India has an interest in that, as well.
  
In pursuit of regional security, we will continue to welcome dialogue between India and Pakistan, even aswe recognize that disputes between your two countries can only be resolved by the people of your twocountries.
More broadly, India and the United States can partner in Asia.  Today, the United States is once againplaying a leadership role in Asia -- strengthening old alliances; deepening relationships, as we are doingwith China; and we’re reengaging with regional organizations like ASEAN and joining the East Asia summit -
- organizations in which India is also a partner.  Like your neighbors in Southeast Asia, we want India notonly to “look East,” we want India to “engage East” -- because it will increase the security and prosperity ofall our nations.
As two global leaders, the United States and India can partner for global security -- especially as Indiaserves on the Security Council over the next two years.  Indeed, the just and sustainable international orderthat America seeks includes a United Nations that is efficient, effective, credible and legitimate.  That is whyI can say today, in the years ahead, I look forward to a reformed United Nations Security Council thatincludes India as a permanent member.
Now, let me suggest that with increased power comes increased responsibility.  The United Nations existsto fulfill its founding ideals of preserving peace and security, promoting global cooperation, and advancinghuman rights.  These are the responsibilities of all nations, but especially those that seek to lead in the 21stcentury.  And so we look forward to working with India -- and other nations that aspire to Security Councilmembership -- to ensure that the Security Council is effective; that resolutions are implemented, thatsanctions are enforced; that we strengthen the international norms which recognize the rights andresponsibilities of all nations and all individuals.
This includes our responsibility to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.  Since I took office, the UnitedStates has reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our national security strategy, and we've agreed withRussia to reduce our own arsenals.  We have put preventing nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism atthe top of our nuclear agenda, and we have strengthened the cornerstone of the global non-proliferationregime, which is the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Together, the United States and India can pursue our goal of securing the world’s vulnerable nuclearmaterials.  We can make it clear that even as every nation has the right to peaceful nuclear energy, everynation must also meet its international obligations -- and that includes the Islamic Republic of Iran.  Andtogether, we can pursue a vision that Indian leaders have espoused since independence -- a world withoutnuclear weapons.
And this leads me to the final area where our countries can partner -- strengthening the foundations ofdemocratic governance, not only at home but abroad.
In the United States, my administration has worked to make government more open and transparent andaccountable to people.  Here in India, you’re harnessing technologies to do the same, as I saw yesterday atan expo in Mumbai.  Your landmark Right to Information Act is empowering citizens with the ability to get theservices to which they’re entitled -- and to hold officials accountable.
  
Voters can get information about candidates by text message.  And you’re delivering education and healthcare services to rural communities, as I saw yesterday when I joined an e-panchayat with villagers inRajasthan.
Now, in a new collaboration on open government, our two countries are going to share our experience,identify what works, and develop the next generation of tools to empower citizens.  And in another exampleof how American and Indian partnership can address global challenges, we’re going to share theseinnovations with civil society groups and countries around the world.  We’re going to show that democracy,more than any other form of government, delivers for the common man -- and woman.
Likewise, when Indians vote, the whole world watches.  Thousands of political parties; hundreds ofthousands of polling centers; millions of candidates and poll workers -- and 700 million voters.  There’snothing like it on the planet.  There is so much that countries transitioning to democracy could learn fromIndia’s experience, so much expertise that India can share with the world.  And that, too, is what is possiblewhen the world’s largest democracy embraces its role as a global leader.
As the world’s two largest democracies, we must never forget that the price of our own freedom is standingup for the freedom of others. Indians know this, for it is the story of your nation.  Before he ever began hisstruggle for Indian independence, Gandhi stood up for the rights of Indians in South Africa.  Just as others,including the United States, supported Indian independence, India championed the self-determination ofpeoples from Africa to Asia as they, too, broke free from colonialism.  And along with the United States,you’ve been a leader in supporting democratic development and civil society groups around the world.  Andthis, too, is part of India’s greatness.
Now, we all understand every country will follow its own path.  No one nation has a monopoly on wisdom,and no nation should ever try to impose its values on another.  But when peaceful democratic movementsare suppressed -- as they have been in Burma, for example -- then the democracies of the world cannotremain silent.  For it is unacceptable to gun down peaceful protestors and incarcerate political prisonersdecade after decade.  It is unacceptable to hold the aspirations of an entire people hostage to the greed andparanoia of bankrupt regimes.  It is unacceptable to steal elections, as the regime in Burma has done againfor all the world to see.
Faced with such gross violations of human rights, it is the responsibility of the international community --especially leaders like the United States and India -- to condemn it.  And if I can be frank, in internationalfora, India has often shied away from some of these issues.  But speaking up for those who cannot do so forthemselves is not interfering in the affairs of other countries.  It’s not violating the rights of sovereignnations.  It is staying true to our democratic principles.  It is giving meaning to the human rights that we sayare universal.  And it sustains the progress that in Asia and around the world has helped turn dictatorshipsinto democracies and ultimately increased our security in the world.
So promoting shared prosperity, preserving peace and security, strengthening democratic governance andhuman rights -- these are the responsibilities of leadership.  And as global partners, this is the leadershipthat the United States and India can offer in the 21st century.  Ultimately, though, this cannot be arelationship only between presidents and prime ministers, or in the halls of this Parliament.  Ultimately, thismust be a partnership between our peoples.  So I want to conclude by speaking directly to the people ofIndia who are watching today.
  
In your lives, you have overcome odds that might have overwhelmed a lesser country.  In just decades, youhave achieved progress and development that took other nations centuries.  You are now assuming yourrightful place as a leader among nations.  Your parents and grandparents imagined this.  Your children andgrandchildren will look back on this.  But only this generation of Indians can seize the possibilities of themoment.
As you carry on with the hard work ahead, I want every Indian citizen to know:  The United States ofAmerica will not simply be cheering you on from the sidelines.  We will be right there with you, shoulder toshoulder.  Because we believe in the promise of India.  We believe that the future is what we make it.  Webelieve that no matter who you are or where you come from, every person can fulfill their God-givenpotential, just as a Dalit like Dr. Ambedkar could lift himself up and pen the words of the constitution thatprotects the rights of all Indians.
We believe that no matter where you live -- whether a village in Punjab or the bylanes of Chandni Chowk --an old section of Kolkata or a new high-rise in Bangalore -- every person deserves the same chance to livein security and dignity, to get an education, to find work, to give their children a better future.
And we believe that when countries and cultures put aside old habits and attitudes that keep people apart,when we recognize our common humanity, then we can begin to fulfill these aspirations that we share.  It’s asimple lesson contained in that collection of stories which has guided Indians for centuries -- thePanchtantra.  And it’s the spirit of the inscription seen by all who enter this great hall:  “That one is mine andthe other a stranger is the concept of little minds.  But to the large-hearted, the world itself is their family.”
This is the story of India; this is the story of America -- that despite their differences, people can seethemselves in one another, and work together and succeed together as one proud nation.  And it can be thespirit of partnership between our nations -- that even as we honor the histories which in different times keptus apart, even as we preserve what makes us unique in a globalized world, we can recognize how much wecan achieve together.
And if we let this simple concept be our guide, if we pursue the vision I’ve described today -- a globalpartnership to meet global challenges -- then I have no doubt that future generations -- Indians andAmericans -- will live in a world that is more prosperous and more secure and more just because of thebonds that our generation has forged today.
So, thank you, and Jai Hind.  And long live the partnership between India and the United States.
