Thank you very much.  Everybody, please have a seat.  Thank you very much.  Well, thankyou.  It is good to be back. It is good to be back in New York, it is good to be back in theGreat Hall at Cooper Union.
We’ve got some special guests here that I want to acknowledge.  Congresswoman CarolynMaloney is here in the house.  Governor David Paterson is here.  Attorney General AndrewCuomo.  State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli is here.  The Mayor of New York City, MichaelBloomberg.  Dr. George Campbell, Jr., president of Cooper Union. And all the citywide electedofficials who are here.  Thank you very much for your attendance.
It is wonderful to be back in Cooper Union, where generations of leaders and citizens havecome to defend their ideas and contest their differences.  It’s also good to be back in LowerManhattan, a few blocks from Wall Street.  It really is good to be back, because Wall Street isthe heart of our nation’s financial sector.
Now, since I last spoke here two years ago, our country has been through a terrible trial. More than 8 million people have lost their jobs.  Countless small businesses have had to shuttheir doors.  Trillions of dollars in savings have been lost -- forcing seniors to put offretirement, young people to postpone college, entrepreneurs to give up on the dream ofstarting a company.  And as a nation we were forced to take unprecedented steps to rescuethe financial system and the broader economy.
  
And as a result of the decisions we made -- some of which, let’s face it, were very unpopular -
- we are seeing hopeful signs.  A little more than one year ago we were losing an average of750,000 jobs each month.  Today, America is adding jobs again.  One year ago the economywas shrinking rapidly.  Today the economy is growing.  In fact, we’ve seen the fastestturnaround in growth in nearly three decades.
But you’re here and I’m here because we’ve got more work to do.  Until this progress is feltnot just on Wall Street but on Main Street we cannot be satisfied.  Until the millions of ourneighbors who are looking for work can find a job, and wages are growing at a meaningfulpace, we may be able to claim a technical recovery -- but we will not have truly recovered. And even as we seek to revive this economy, it’s also incumbent on us to rebuild it strongerthan before.  We don’t want an economy that has the same weaknesses that led to this crisis. And that means addressing some of the underlying problems that led to this turmoil anddevastation in the first place.Now, one of the most significant contributors to this recession was a financial crisis as dire asany we’ve known in generations -- at least since the ’30s.  And that crisis was born of a failureof responsibility -- from Wall Street all the way to Washington -- that brought down many ofthe world’s largest financial firms and nearly dragged our economy into a second GreatDepression.
It was that failure of responsibility that I spoke about when I came to New York more thantwo years ago -- before the worst of the crisis had unfolded.  It was back in 2007.  And I takeno satisfaction in noting that my comments then have largely been borne out by the eventsthat followed.  But I repeat what I said then because it is essential that we learn the lessonsfrom this crisis so we don’t doom ourselves to repeat it.  And make no mistake, that is exactlywhat will happen if we allow this moment to pass -- and that’s an outcome that isunacceptable to me and it’s unacceptable to you, the American people.
As I said on this stage two years ago, I believe in the power of the free market.  I believe in astrong financial sector that helps people to raise capital and get loans and invest theirsavings.  That’s part of what has made America what it is.  But a free market was nevermeant to be a free license to take whatever you can get, however you can get it.  That’s whathappened too often in the years leading up to this crisis.  Some -- and let me be clear, not all-- but some on Wall Street forgot that behind every dollar traded or leveraged there’s familylooking to buy a house, or pay for an education, open a business, save for retirement.  Whathappens on Wall Street has real consequences across the country, across our economy.
I’ve spoken before about the need to build a new foundation for economic growth in the 21stcentury.  And given the importance of the financial sector, Wall Street reform is an absolutelyessential part of that foundation.  Without it, our house will continue to sit on shifting sands,and our families, businesses, and the global economy will be vulnerable to future crises. That’s why I feel so strongly that we need to enact a set of updated, commonsense rules toensure accountability on Wall Street and to protect consumers in our financial system.
  
Now, here’s the good news:  A comprehensive plan to achieve these reforms has alreadypassed the House of Representatives.  A Senate version is currently being debated, drawingon ideas from Democrats and Republicans.  Both bills represent significant improvement onthe flawed rules that we have in place today, despite the furious effort of industry lobbyists toshape this legislation to their special interests.
And for those of you in the financial sector I'm sure that some of these lobbyists work for youand they’re doing what they are being paid to do.  But I’m here today specifically -- when Ispeak to the titans of industry here -- because I want to urge you to join us, instead offighting us in this effort.  I’m here because I believe that these reforms are, in the end, notonly in the best interest of our country, but in the best interest of the financial sector.  AndI’m here to explain what reform will look like, and why it matters.
Now, first, the bill being considered in the Senate would create what we did not have before,and that is a way to protect the financial system and the broader economy and Americantaxpayers in the event that a large financial firm begins to fail.  If there’s a Lehmans or anAIG, how can we respond in a way that doesn’t force taxpayers to pick up the tab or,alternatively, could bring down the whole system.
In an ordinary local bank when it approaches insolvency, we’ve got a process, an orderlyprocess through the FDIC, that ensures that depositors are protected, maintains confidence inthe banking system, and it works.  Customers and taxpayers are protected and owners andmanagement lose their equity.  But we don’t have that kind of process designed to contain thefailure of a Lehman Brothers or any of the largest and most interconnected financial firms inour country.
That’s why, when this crisis began, crucial decisions about what would happen to some of theworld’s biggest companies -- companies employing tens of thousands of people and holdinghundreds of billions of dollars in assets -- had to take place in hurried discussions in themiddle of the night.  And that’s why, to save the entire economy from an even worsecatastrophe, we had to deploy taxpayer dollars.  Now, much of that money has now been paidback and my administration has proposed a fee to be paid by large financial firms to recoverall the money, every dime, because the American people should never have been put in thatposition in the first place.
But this is why we need a system to shut these firms down with the least amount of collateraldamage to innocent people and innocent businesses.  And from the start, I’ve insisted that thefinancial industry, not taxpayers, shoulder the costs in the event that a large financialcompany should falter.  The goal is to make certain that taxpayers are never again on thehook because a firm is deemed “too big to fail.”
  
Now, there’s a legitimate debate taking place about how best to ensure taxpayers are heldharmless in this process.  And that’s a legitimate debate, and I encourage that debate.  Butwhat’s not legitimate is to suggest that somehow the legislation being proposed is going toencourage future taxpayer bailouts, as some have claimed.  That makes for a good soundbite, but it’s not factually accurate.  It is not true.  In fact, the system as it stands -- thesystem as it stands is what led to a series of massive, costly taxpayer bailouts.  And it’s onlywith reform that we can avoid a similar outcome in the future.  In other words, a vote forreform is a vote to put a stop to taxpayer-funded bailouts.  That’s the truth.  End of story. And nobody should be fooled in this debate.
By the way, these changes have the added benefit of creating incentives within the industry toensure that no one company can ever threaten to bring down the whole economy.
To that end, the bill would also enact what’s known as the Volcker Rule -- and there’s a tallguy sitting in the front row here, Paul Volcker -- who we named it after.  And it doessomething very simple:  It places some limits on the size of banks and the kinds of risks thatbanking institutions can take.  This will not only safeguard our system against crises, this willalso make our system stronger and more competitive by instilling confidence here at homeand across the globe.  Markets depend on that confidence.  Part of what led to the turmoil ofthe past two years was that in the absence of clear rules and sound practices, people didn’ttrust that our system was one in which it was safe to invest or lend.  As we’ve seen, thatharms all of us.
So by enacting these reforms, we’ll help ensure that our financial system -- and our economy-- continues to be the envy of the world.  That’s the first thing, making sure that we can winddown one firm if it gets into trouble without bringing the whole system down or forcingtaxpayers to fund a bailout.
Number two, reform would bring new transparency to many financial markets.  As you know,part of what led to this crisis was firms like AIG and others who were making huge and riskybets, using derivatives and other complicated financial instruments, in ways that defiedaccountability, or even common sense.  In fact, many practices were so opaque, so confusing,so complex that the people inside the firms didn’t understand them,  much less those whowere charged with overseeing them.  They weren’t fully aware of the massive bets that werebeing placed.  That’s what led Warren Buffett to describe derivatives that were bought andsold with little oversight as “financial weapons of mass destruction.”  That’s what he calledthem.  And that’s why reform will rein in excess and help ensure that these kinds oftransactions take place in the light of day.
Now, there’s been a great deal of concern about these changes.  So I want to reiterate:  Thereis a legitimate role for these financial instruments in our economy.  They can help allay riskand spur investment.  And there are a lot of companies that use these instruments to thatlegitimate end -- they are managing exposure to fluctuating prices or currencies, fluctuatingmarkets.
  
For example, a business might hedge against rising oil prices by buying a financial product tosecure stable fuel costs, so an airlines might have an interest in locking in a decent price. That’s how markets are supposed to work.  The problem is these markets operated in theshadows of our economy, invisible to regulators, invisible to the public.  So reckless practiceswere rampant.  Risks accrued until they threatened our entire financial system.
And that’s why these reforms are designed to respect legitimate activities but prevent recklessrisk taking.  That’s why we want to ensure that financial products like standardized derivativesare traded out in the open, in the full view of businesses, investors, and those charged withoversight.
And I was encouraged to see a Republican senator join with Democrats this week in movingforward on this issue.  That's a good sign.  That's a good sign.  For without action, we’llcontinue to see what amounts to highly-leveraged, loosely-monitored gambling in our financialsystem, putting taxpayers and the economy in jeopardy.  And the only people who ought tofear the kind of oversight and transparency that we're proposing are those whose conduct willfail this scrutiny.
Third, this plan would enact the strongest consumer financial protections ever.  And that'sabsolutely necessary because this financial crisis wasn’t just the result of decisions made inthe executive suites on Wall Street; it was also the result of decisions made around kitchentables across America, by folks who took on mortgages and credit cards and auto loans.  Andwhile it’s true that many Americans took on financial obligations that they knew or shouldhave known they could not have afforded, millions of others were, frankly, duped.  They weremisled by deceptive terms and conditions, buried deep in the fine print.
And while a few companies made out like bandits by exploiting their customers, our entireeconomy was made more vulnerable.  Millions of people have now lost their homes.  Tens ofmillions more have lost value in their homes.  Just about every sector of our economy has feltthe pain, whether you’re paving driveways in Arizona, or selling houses in Ohio, or you'redoing home repairs in California, or you’re using your home equity to start a small business inFlorida.
That’s why we need to give consumers more protection and more power in our financialsystem.  This is not about stifling competition, stifling innovation; it’s just the opposite.  Witha dedicated agency setting ground rules and looking out for ordinary people in our financialsystem, we will empower consumers with clear and concise information when they’re makingfinancial decisions.  So instead of competing to offer confusing products, companies willcompete the old-fashioned way, by offering better products.  And that will mean more choicesfor consumers, more opportunities for businesses, and more stability in our financial system. And unless your business model depends on bilking people, there is little to fear from thesenew rules.
  
Number four, the last key component of reform.  These Wall Street reforms will giveshareholders new power in the financial system.  They will get what we call a say on pay, avoice with respect to the salaries and bonuses awarded to top executives.  And the SEC willhave the authority to give shareholders more say in corporate elections, so that investors andpension holders have a stronger role in determining who manages the company in whichthey’ve placed their savings.
Now, Americans don’t begrudge anybody for success when that success is earned.  But whenwe read in the past, and sometimes in the present, about enormous executive bonuses atfirms -- even as they’re relying on assistance from taxpayers or they’re taking huge risks thatthreaten the system as a whole or their company is doing badly -- it offends our fundamentalvalues.
Not only that, some of the salaries and bonuses that we’ve seen creates perverse incentivesto take reckless risks that contributed to the crisis.  It’s what helped lead to a relentless focuson a company’s next quarter, to the detriment of its next year or its next decade.  And it ledto a situation in which folks with the most to lose -- stock and pension holders -- had the leastto say in the process.  And that has to change.
Let me close by saying this.  I have laid out a set of Wall Street reforms.  These are reformsthat would put an end to taxpayer bailouts; that would bring complex financial dealings out ofthe shadows; that would protect consumers; and that would give shareholders more power inthe financial system.  But let’s face it, we also need reform in Washington. And the debate --the debate over these changes is a perfect example.
I mean, we have seen battalions of financial industry lobbyists descending on Capitol Hill,firms spending millions to influence the outcome of this debate.  We’ve seen misleadingarguments and attacks that are designed not to improve the bill but to weaken or to kill it. We’ve seen a bipartisan process buckle under the weight of these withering forces, even aswe‘ve produced a proposal that by all accounts is a commonsense, reasonable, non-ideologicalapproach to target the root problems that led to the turmoil in our financial sector andultimately in our entire economy.
So we’ve seen business as usual in Washington, but I believe we can and must put this kind ofcynical politics aside.  We’ve got to put an end to it.  That’s why I’m here today. That’s whyI’m here today.
And to those of you who are in the financial sector, let me say this, we will not always see eyeto eye.  We will not always agree.  But that doesn’t mean that we’ve got to choose betweentwo extremes.  We do not have to choose between markets that are unfettered by evenmodest protections against crisis, or markets that are stymied by onerous rules that suppressenterprise and innovation.  That is a false choice.  And we need no more proof than the crisisthat we’ve just been through.
  
You see, there has always been a tension between the desire to allow markets to functionwithout interference and the absolute necessity of rules to prevent markets from falling out ofkilter.  But managing that tension, one that we’ve debated since the founding of this nation, iswhat has allowed our country to keep up with a changing world.  For in taking up this debate,in figuring out how to apply well-worn principles with each new age, we ensure that we don’ttip too far one way or the other -- that our democracy remains as dynamic and our economyremains as dynamic as it has in the past.  So, yes, this debate can be contentious.  It can beheated.  But in the end it serves only to make our country stronger.  It has allowed us toadapt and to thrive.
And I read a report recently that I think fairly illustrates this point.  It’s from Time Magazine. I’m going to quote:  “Through the great banking houses of Manhattan last week ran wild-eyedalarm.  Big bankers stared at one another in anger and astonishment.  A bill just passed…would rivet upon their institutions what they considered a monstrous system… such a system,they felt, would not only rob them of their pride of profession but would reduce all U.S.banking to its lowest level.”  That appeared in Time Magazine in June of 1933.  The systemthat caused so much consternation, so much concern was the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation, also known as the FDIC, an institution that has successfully secured the depositsof generations of Americans.
In the end, our system only works -- our markets are only free -- when there are basicsafeguards that prevent abuse, that check excesses, that ensure that it is more profitable toplay by the rules than to game the system.  And that is what the reforms we’ve beenproposing are designed to achieve -- no more, no less.  And because that is how we willensure that our economy works for consumers, that it works for investors, and that it worksfor financial institutions -- in other words, that it works for all of us -- that’s why we’reworking so hard to get this stuff passed.
This is the central lesson not only of this crisis but of our history.  It’s what I said when Ispoke here two years ago.  Because ultimately, there is no dividing line between Main Streetand Wall Street.  We will rise or we will fall together as one nation. And that is why I urge allof you to join me.  I urge all of you to join me, to join those who are seeking to pass thesecommonsense reforms.  And for those of you in the financial industry, I urge you to join menot only because it is in the interest of your industry, but also because it’s in the interest ofyour country.
Thank you so much.  God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.  Thank you.
