Thank you very much. To Sara Bloomfield, for the wonderful introduction and the outstandingwork she's doing; to Fred Zeidman; Joel Geiderman; Mr. Wiesel -- thank you for your wisdomand your witness; Speaker Nancy Pelosi; Senator Dick Durbin; members of Congress; ourgood friend the Ambassador of Israel; members of the United States Holocaust MemorialCouncil; and most importantly, the survivors and rescuers and their families who are heretoday. It is a great honor for me to be here, and I'm grateful that I have the opportunity toaddress you briefly.
We gather today to mourn the loss of so many lives, and celebrate those who saved them;honor those who survived, and contemplate the obligations of the living.
It is the grimmest of ironies that one of the most savage, barbaric acts of evil in history beganin one of the most modernized societies of its time, where so many markers of humanprogress became tools of human depravity: science that can heal used to kill; education thatcan enlighten used to rationalize away basic moral impulses; the bureaucracy that sustainsmodern life used as the machinery of mass death -- a ruthless, chillingly efficient systemwhere many were responsible for the killing, but few got actual blood on their hands.
While the uniqueness of the Holocaust in scope and in method is truly astounding, theHolocaust was driven by many of the same forces that have fueled atrocities throughouthistory: the scapegoating that leads to hatred and blinds us to our common humanity; thejustifications that replace conscience and allow cruelty to spread; the willingness of those whoare neither perpetrators nor victims to accept the assigned role of bystander, believing the liethat good people are ever powerless or alone, the fiction that we do not have a choice.

But while we are here today to bear witness to the human capacity to destroy, we are alsohere to pay tribute to the human impulse to save. In the moral accounting of the Holocaust,as we reckon with numbers like 6 million, as we recall the horror of numbers etched intoarms, we also factor in numbers like these: 7,200 -- the number of Danish Jews ferried tosafety, many of whom later returned home to find the neighbors who rescued them had alsofaithfully tended their homes and businesses and belongings while they were gone.
We remember the number five -- the five righteous men and women who join us today fromPoland. We are awed by your acts of courage and conscience. And your presence todaycompels each of us to ask ourselves whether we would have done what you did. We can onlyhope that the answer is yes.
We also remember the number 5,000 -- the number of Jews rescued by the villagers of LeChambon, France -- one life saved for each of its 5,000 residents. Not a single Jew who camethere was turned away, or turned in. But it was not until decades later that the villagers spokeof what they had done -- and even then, only reluctantly. The author of a book on the rescuefound that those he interviewed were baffled by his interest. "How could you call us 'good'?"they said. "We were doing what had to be done."
That is the question of the righteous -- those who would do extraordinary good atextraordinary risk not for affirmation or acclaim or to advance their own interests, but becauseit is what must be done. They remind us that no one is born a savior or a murderer -- theseare choices we each have the power to make. They teach us that no one can make us intobystanders without our consent, and that we are never truly alone -- that if we have thecourage to heed that "still, small voice" within us, we can form a minyan for righteousnessthat can span a village, even a nation.
Their legacy is our inheritance. And the question is, how do we honor and preserve it? How dowe ensure that "never again" isn't an empty slogan, or merely an aspiration, but also a call toaction?
I believe we start by doing what we are doing today -- by bearing witness, by fighting thesilence that is evil's greatest co-conspirator.
In the face of horrors that defy comprehension, the impulse to silence is understandable. Myown great uncle returned from his service in World War II in a state of shock, saying little,alone with painful memories that would not leave his head. He went up into the attic,according to the stories that I've heard, and wouldn't come down for six months. He was oneof the liberators -- someone who at a very tender age had seen the unimaginable. And sosome of the liberators who are here today honor us with their presence -- all of whom wehonor for their extraordinary service. My great uncle was part of the 89th Infantry Division --the first Americans to reach a Nazi concentration camp. And they liberated Ohrdruf, part ofBuchenwald, where tens of thousands had perished.

The story goes that when the Americans marched in, they discovered the starving survivorsand the piles of dead bodies. And General Eisenhower made a decision. He ordered Germansfrom the nearby town to tour the camp, so they could see what had been done in their name.And he ordered American troops to tour the camp, so they could see the evil they werefighting against. Then he invited congressmen and journalists to bear witness. And he orderedthat photographs and films be made. Some of us have seen those same images, whether inthe Holocaust Museum or when I visited Yad Vashem, and they never leave you. Eisenhowersaid that he wanted "to be in a position to give firsthand evidence of these things, if ever, inthe future, there develops a tendency to charge these allegations merely to propaganda."
Eisenhower understood the danger of silence. He understood that if no one knew what hadhappened, that would be yet another atrocity -- and it would be the perpetrators' ultimatetriumph.
What Eisenhower did to record these crimes for history is what we are doing here today.That's what Elie Wiesel and the survivors we honor here do by fighting to make theirmemories part of our collective memory. That's what the Holocaust Museum does every dayon our National Mall, the place where we display for the world our triumphs and failures andthe lessons we've learned from our history. It's the very opposite of silence.
But we must also remember that bearing witness is not the end of our obligation -- it's justthe beginning. We know that evil has yet to run its course on Earth. We've seen it in thiscentury in the mass graves and the ashes of villages burned to the ground, and children usedas soldiers and rape used as a weapon of war. To this day, there are those who insist theHolocaust never happened; who perpetrate every form of intolerance -- racism and anti-
Semitism, homophobia, xenophobia, sexism, and more -- hatred that degrades its victim anddiminishes us all.
Today, and every day, we have an opportunity, as well as an obligation, to confront thesescourges -- to fight the impulse to turn the channel when we see images that disturb us, orwrap ourselves in the false comfort that others' sufferings are not our own. Instead we havethe opportunity to make a habit of empathy; to recognize ourselves in each other; to commitourselves to resisting injustice and intolerance and indifference in whatever forms they maytake -- whether confronting those who tell lies about history, or doing everything we can toprevent and end atrocities like those that took place in Rwanda, those taking place in Darfur.That is my commitment as President. I hope that is yours, as well.
It will not be easy. At times, fulfilling these obligations require self-reflection. But in the finalanalysis, I believe history gives us cause for hope rather than despair -- the hope of a chosenpeople who have overcome oppression since the days of Exodus; of the nation of Israel risingfrom the destruction of the Holocaust; of the strong and enduring bonds between our nations.

It is the hope, too, of those who not only survived, but chose to live, teaching us the meaningof courage and resilience and dignity. I'm thinking today of a study conducted after the warthat found that Holocaust survivors living in America actually had a higher birthrate thanAmerican Jews. What a stunning act of faith -- to bring a child in a world that has shown youso much cruelty; to believe that no matter what you have endured, or how much you havelost, in the end, you have a duty to life.
We find cause for hope as well in Protestant and Catholic children attending school together inNorthern Ireland; in Hutus and Tutsis living side by side, forgiving neighbors who have donethe unforgivable; in a movement to save Darfur that has thousands of high school and collegechapters in 25 countries, and brought 70,000 people to the Washington Mall -- people ofevery age and faith and background and race united in common cause with suffering brothersand sisters halfway around the world.
Those numbers can be our future -- our fellow citizens of the world showing us how to makethe journey from oppression to survival, from witness to resistance, and ultimately toreconciliation. That is what we mean when we say "never again."
So today, during this season when we celebrate liberation, resurrection, and the possibility ofredemption, may each of us renew our resolve to do what must be done. And may we striveeach day, both individually and as a nation, to be among the righteous.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.