Alright. Good afternoon, everybody.  Today, the United Nations Security Council votedoverwhelmingly to sanction Iran for its continued failure to live up to its obligations.  Thisresolution will put in place the toughest sanctions ever faced by the Iranian government, andit sends an unmistakable message about the international community’s commitment tostopping the spread of nuclear weapons.
For years, the Iranian government has failed to live up to its obligations under the NuclearNon-Proliferation Treaty.  It has violated its commitments to the International Atomic EnergyAgency.  It has ignored U.N. Security Council resolutions.  And while Iran’s leaders hidebehind outlandish rhetoric, their actions have been deeply troubling.  Indeed, when I tookoffice just over 16 months ago, Iranian intransigence was well-established.  Iran had gonefrom zero centrifuges spinning to several thousand, and the international community wasdivided about how to move forward.
Yet this day was not inevitable.  We made clear from the beginning of my administration thatthe United States was prepared to pursue diplomatic solutions to address the concerns overIranian nuclear programs.  I extended the offer of engagement on the basis of mutual interestand mutual respect.
  
And together with the United Kingdom, with Russia, China, and Germany, we sat down withour Iranian counterparts.  We offered the opportunity of a better relationship between Iranand the international community -- one that reduced Iran’s political isolation, and increased itseconomic integration with the rest of the world.  In short, we offered the Iranian governmentthe prospect of a better future for its people, if -- and only if -- it lives up to its internationalobligations.
So there is no double standard at play here.  We’ve made it clear, time and again, that werespect Iran’s right, like all countries, to access peaceful nuclear energy.  That is a rightembedded in the NPT -- a treaty that has to serve as the safeguard against a world in whichmore nations acquire the world’s most deadly weapons, and international law is treated as anempty promise.  That NPT treaty was signed by all the parties involved, and it is a treaty thatthe United States has sought to strengthen from the day I took office, including through ourown commitments to reduce America’s nuclear arsenal.
So let me repeat:  We recognize Iran’s rights.  But with those rights come responsibilities. And time and again, the Iranian government has failed to meet those responsibilities.  Iranconcealed a nuclear enrichment facility in Qom that raised serious questions about the natureof its program.  Iran further violated its own obligations under U.N. Security Councilresolutions to suspend uranium enrichment.  Instead, they’re enriching up to 20 percent.  Ithas failed to comply fully with IAEA’s requirements.  Indeed, Iran is the only NPT signatory inthe world -- the only one -- that cannot convince the IAEA that its nuclear program isintended for peaceful purposes.
That’s why the international community was compelled to impose these seriousconsequences.  These are the most comprehensive sanctions that the Iranian government hasfaced.  They will impose restrictions on Iran’s nuclear activities, its ballistic missile program,and, for the first time, its conventional military.  They will put a new framework in place tostop Iranian smuggling, and crack down on Iranian banks and financial transactions.  Theytarget individuals, entities, and institutions -- including those associated with theRevolutionary Guard -- that have supported Iran’s nuclear program and prospered from illicitactivities at the expense of the Iranian people.  And we will ensure that these sanctions arevigorously enforced, just as we continue to refine and enforce our own sanctions on Iranalongside our friends and our allies.
The strong resolution that was passed today benefited from strong international support.  Invoting for it, we were joined by nations from Asia, Africa, Europe, and Latin America --including Russia and China.  And these sanctions show the united view of the internationalcommunity that a nuclear arms race in the Middle East is in nobody’s interest, and thatnations must be held accountable for challenging the global non-proliferation regime.  TheIranian government must understand that true security will not come through the pursuit ofnuclear weapons.  True security will come through adherence to international law and thedemonstration of its peaceful intent.
  
We know that the Iranian government will not change its behavior overnight, but today’s votedemonstrates the growing costs that will come with Iranian intransigence.  And I want to beclear:  These sanctions do not close the door on diplomacy.  Iran continues to have theopportunity to take a different and better path.  I would like nothing more than to reach theday when the Iranian government fulfills its international obligations -- a day when thesesanctions are lifted, previous sanctions are lifted, and the Iranian people can finally fulfill thegreatness of the Iranian nation.
Indeed, these sanctions are not directed at the Iranian people.  As I said in Cairo, for decadesthe Iranian government has defined itself in opposition to my country.  But faced with theopportunity to find a new way forward -- one that would benefit its own people -- the Iraniangovernment has chosen instead to remain a prisoner of the past.
Saturday will mark one year from the day that an election captivated the attention of theworld -- an event that should have been remembered for how the Iranian people participatedwith remarkable enthusiasm, but will instead be remembered for how the Iranian governmentbrutally suppressed dissent and murdered the innocent, including a young woman left to die inthe street.
Actions do have consequences, and today the Iranian government will face some of thoseconsequences.  Because whether it is threatening the nuclear non-proliferation regime, or thehuman rights of its own citizens, or the stability of its own neighbors by supporting terrorism,the Iranian government continues to demonstrate that its own unjust actions are a threat tojustice everywhere.
I want and hope for the people of Iran that the government of Iran will make a differentchoice.  It can make a different choice and pursue a course that will reaffirm the NPT as thebasis of global non-proliferation and disarmament -- a course that will advance Iran’s ownsecurity and prosperity, and the peace of the wider world.  Today’s sanctions are yet anothersignal that if the Iranian government continues to undermine the NPT and the peace that itprotects, then Iran will find itself more isolated, less prosperous and less secure.
Thank you.
