Hello, Galesburg!  Well, it’s good to be home in Illinois!  It is good to be back. It’s good to beback.  Thank you.  Thank you so much, everybody.  Thank you.  Everybody, have a seat,have a seat.  Well, it is good to be back. I want to, first of all, thank Knox College -- I want to thank Knox College and your president,Teresa Amott, for having me here today.  Give Teresa a big round of applause.  I want tothank your Congresswoman, Cheri Bustos, who’s here.  We've got Governor Quinn here.  I'mtold we've got your Lieutenant Governor, Sheila Simon, is here.  There she is.  AttorneyGeneral Lisa Madigan is here.
I see a bunch of my former colleagues, some folks who I haven't seen in years and I'mlooking forward to saying hi to.  One in particular I've got to mention, one of my favoritesfrom the Illinois Senate -- John Sullivan is in the house.  John was one of my earliestsupporters when I was running for the U.S. Senate, and it came in really handy because he’sgot, like, 10 brothers and sisters, and his wife has got 10 brothers and sisters -- so they’vegot this entire precinct just in their family.  And they all look like John -- the brothers do -- sohe doesn’t have to go to every event.  He can just send one of his brothers out.  It is good tosee him.
  
 Dick Durbin couldn’t make it today, but he sends his best. And we love Dick.  He’s doing agreat job.  And we’ve got one of my favorite neighbors, the Senator from Missouri, ClaireMcCaskill, in the house, because we’re going to Missouri later this afternoon.
And all of you are here, and it’s great to see you.  And I hope everybody is having a wonderfulsummer.  The weather is perfect.  Whoever was in charge of that, good job.
So, eight years ago, I came here to deliver the commencement address for the class of 2005. Things were a little different back then.  For example, I had no gray hair -- or a motorcade. Didn’t even have a prompter.  In fact, there was a problem in terms of printing out the speechbecause the printer didn’t work here and we had to drive it in from somewhere. But it was myfirst big speech as your newest senator.  And on the way here I was telling Cheri and Claire about how important this area was, one ofthe areas that I spent the most time in outside of Chicago, and how much it representedwhat’s best in America and folks who were willing to work hard and do right by their families. And I came here to talk about what a changing economy was doing to the middle class -- andwhat we, as a country, needed to do to give every American a chance to get ahead in the 21stcentury. See, I had just spent a year traveling the state and listening to your stories -- of proudMaytag workers losing their jobs when the plant moved down to Mexico.  A lot of folks hereremember that.  Of teachers whose salaries weren’t keeping up with the rising cost ofgroceries.  Of young people who had the drive and the energy, but not the money to afford acollege education.
So these were stories of families who had worked hard, believed in the American Dream, butthey felt like the odds were increasingly stacked against them.  And they were right.  Thingshad changed. In the period after World War II, a growing middle class was the engine of our prosperity. Whether you owned a company, or swept its floors, or worked anywhere in between, thiscountry offered you a basic bargain -- a sense that your hard work would be rewarded withfair wages and decent benefits, the chance to buy a home, to save for retirement, and most ofall, a chance to hand down a better life for your kids. But over time, that engine began to stall -- and a lot of folks here saw it -- that bargain beganto fray.  Technology made some jobs obsolete.  Global competition sent a lot of jobsoverseas.  It became harder for unions to fight for the middle class.  Washington doled outbigger tax cuts to the very wealthy and smaller minimum wage increases for the workingpoor.  
  
And so what happened was that the link between higher productivity and people’s wages andsalaries was broken.  It used to be that, as companies did better, as profits went higher,workers also got a better deal.  And that started changing.  So the income of the top 1percent nearly quadrupled from 1979 to 2007, but the typical family’s incomes barely budged. And towards the end of those three decades, a housing bubble, credit cards, a churningfinancial sector was keeping the economy artificially juiced up, so sometimes it papered oversome of these long-term trends.  But by the time I took office in 2009 as your President, weall know the bubble had burst, and it cost millions of Americans their jobs, and their homes,and their savings.  And I know a lot of folks in this area were hurt pretty bad.  And thedecades-long erosion that had been taking place -- the erosion of middle-class security -- wassuddenly laid bare for everybody to see. Now, today, five years after the start of that Great Recession, America has fought its wayback.  We fought our way back.  Together, we saved the auto industry; took on a brokenhealth care system.   We invested in new American technologies to reverse our addiction toforeign oil.  We doubled wind and solar power.  Together, we put in place tough new rules onthe big banks, and protections to crack down on the worst practices of mortgage lenders andcredit card companies.  We changed a tax code too skewed in favor of the wealthiest at theexpense of working families -- so we changed that, and we locked in tax cuts for 98 percent ofAmericans, and we asked those at the top to pay a little bit more.
So you add it all up, and over the past 40 months, our businesses have created 7.2 millionnew jobs.  This year, we’re off to our strongest private sector job growth since 1999.  And because we bet on this country, suddenly foreign companies are, too.  Right now, more ofHonda’s cars are made in America than anyplace else on Earth.  Airbus, the European aircraftcompany, they’re building new planes in Alabama.   And American companies like Ford arereplacing outsourcing with insourcing -- they’re bringing jobs back home.
We sell more products made in America to the rest of the world than ever before.  We producemore natural gas than any country on Earth.  We’re about to produce more of our own oilthan we buy from abroad for the first time in nearly 20 years.  The cost of health care isgrowing at its slowest rate in 50 years.  And our deficits are falling at the fastest rate in 60years.
So thanks to the grit and resilience and determination of the American people -- of folks likeyou -- we’ve been able to clear away the rubble from the financial crisis.  We started to lay anew foundation for stronger, more durable economic growth. And it's happening in our ownpersonal lives as well, right?  A lot of us tightened our belts, shed debt, maybe cut up a coupleof credit cards, refocused on those things that really matter.  
  
As a country, we’ve recovered faster and gone further than most other advanced nations inthe world.  With new American revolutions in energy and technology and manufacturing andhealth care, we're actually poised to reverse the forces that battered the middle class for solong, and start building an economy where everyone who works hard can get ahead. But -- and here's the big “but” -- I’m here to tell you today that we're not there yet.  We allknow that.  We're not there yet.  We've got more work to do.  Even though our businesses arecreating new jobs and have broken record profits, nearly all the income gains of the past 10years have continued to flow to the top 1 percent.  The average CEO has gotten a raise ofnearly 40 percent since 2009.  The average American earns less than he or she did in 1999. And companies continue to hold back on hiring those who’ve been out of work for some time.  Today, more students are earning their degree, but soaring costs saddle them withunsustainable debt.  Health care costs are slowing down, but a lot of working families haven’tseen any of those savings yet.  The stock market rebound helped a lot of families get backmuch of what they had lost in their 401(k)s, but millions of Americans still have no idea howthey’re going to be able to retire.  So in many ways, the trends that I spoke about here in 2005 -- eight years ago -- the trend ofa winner-take-all economy where a few are doing better and better and better, whileeverybody else just treads water -- those trends have been made worse by the recession. And that's a problem. This growing inequality not just of result, inequality of opportunity -- this growing inequality isnot just morally wrong, it’s bad economics.  Because when middle-class families have less tospend, guess what, businesses have fewer consumers.  When wealth concentrates at the verytop, it can inflate unstable bubbles that threaten the economy.  When the rungs on the ladderof opportunity grow farther and farther apart, it undermines the very essence of America --that idea that if you work hard you can make it here. And that’s why reversing these trends has to be Washington’s highest priority.  It has to beWashington's highest priority.  It’s certainly my highest priority.
Unfortunately, over the past couple of years, in particular, Washington hasn’t just ignored thisproblem; too often, Washington has made things worse.
And I have to say that -- because I'm looking around the room -- I've got some friends herenot just who are Democrats,  I've got some friends here who are Republicans -- and I workedwith in the state legislature and they did great work.  But right now, what we’ve got inWashington, we've seen a sizable group of Republican lawmakers suggest that they wouldn’tvote to pay the very bills that Congress rang up.  And that fiasco harmed a fragile recovery in2011 and we can't afford to repeat that.  
  
Then, rather than reduce our deficits with a scalpel -- by cutting out programs we don’t need,fixing ones that we do need that maybe are in need of reform, making government moreefficient -- instead of doing that, we've got folks who’ve insisted on leaving in place a meatcleaver called the sequester that's cost jobs.  It's harmed growth.  It's hurt our military.  It'sgutted investments in education and science and medical research.
Almost every credible economist will tell you it's been a huge drag on this recovery.  And itmeans that we're underinvesting in the things that this country needs to make it a magnet forgood jobs. Then, over the last six months, this gridlock has gotten worse.  I didn't think that waspossible.  The good news is a growing number of Republican senators are looking to join theirDemocratic counterparts and try to get things done in the Senate.  So that's good news.  Forexample, they worked together on an immigration bill that economists say will boost oureconomy by more than a trillion dollars, strengthen border security, make the system work.  But you've got a faction of Republicans in the House who won’t even give that bill a vote.  Andthat same group gutted a farm bill that America’s farmers depend on, but also America's mostvulnerable children depend on. And if you ask some of these folks, some of these folks mostlyin the House, about their economic agenda how it is that they'll strengthen the middle class,they’ll shift the topic to “out-of-control government spending” -- despite the fact that we'vecut the deficit by nearly half as a share of the economy since I took office.
Or they’ll talk about government assistance for the poor, despite the fact that they’ve alreadycut early education for vulnerable kids.  They've already cut insurance for people who’ve losttheir jobs through no fault of their own.  Or they’ll bring up Obamacare -- this is tried and true-- despite the fact that our businesses have created nearly twice as many jobs in this recoveryas businesses had at the same point in the last recovery when there was no Obamacare.
Audience Member:  My daughter has insurance now! President Obama:  I appreciate that.  That’s what this is about.  That’s what this is about. That’s what we've been fighting for.   But with this endless parade of distractions and political posturing and phony scandals,Washington has taken its eye off the ball.  And I am here to say this needs to stop.  Thisneeds to stop.  This moment does not require short-term thinking.  It does not require having the same oldstale debates.  Our focus has to be on the basic economic issues that matter most to you, thepeople we represent.  That’s what we have to spend our time on and our energy on and ourfocus on.
  
And as Washington prepares to enter another budget debate, the stakes for our middle classand everybody who is fighting to get into the middle class could not be higher.  The countriesthat are passive in the face of a global economy, those countries will lose the competition forgood jobs.  They will lose the competition for high living standards.  That’s why America hasto make the investments necessary to promote long-term growth and shared prosperity --rebuilding our manufacturing base, educating our workforce, upgrading our transportationsystems, upgrading our information networks.  That’s what we need to be talking about. That’s what Washington needs to be focused on.  And that’s why, over the next several weeks, in towns across this country, I will be engagingthe American people in this debate.  I'll lay out my ideas for how we build on the cornerstonesof what it means to be middle class in America, and what it takes to work your way into themiddle class in America:  Job security, with good wages and durable industries.  A goodeducation.   A home to call your own.  Affordable health care when you get sick.   A secureretirement even if you’re not rich.  Reducing poverty.  Reducing inequality.  Growingopportunity.  That’s what we need.  That’s what we need.  That’s what we need right now. That’s what we need to be focused on.
Now, some of these ideas I’ve talked about before.  Some of the ideas I offer will be new. Some will require Congress.  Some I will pursue on my own.  Some ideas will benefit folksright away.  Some will take years to fully implement.  But the key is to break through thetendency in Washington to just bounce from crisis to crisis.  What we need is not a three-
month plan, or even a three-year plan; we need a long-term American strategy, based onsteady, persistent effort, to reverse the forces that have conspired against the middle class fordecades. That has to be our project.
Now, of course, we’ll keep pressing on other key priorities. I want to get this immigration billdone.  We still need to work on reducing gun violence.   We’ve got to continue to end the warin Afghanistan, rebalance our fight against al Qaeda.  We need to combat climate change. We’ve got to standing up for civil rights.  We’ve got to stand up for women’s rights.
So all those issues are important, and we’ll be fighting on every one of those issues.  But if wedon’t have a growing, thriving middle class then we won’t have the resources to solve a lot ofthese problems.  We won’t have the resolve, the optimism, the sense of unity that we need tosolve many of these other issues. Now, in this effort, I will look to work with Republicans as well as Democrats wherever I can. And I sincerely believe that there are members of both parties who understand this moment,understand what’s at stake, and I will welcome ideas from anybody across the politicalspectrum.  But I will not allow gridlock, or inaction, or willful indifference to get in our way.
  
That means whatever executive authority I have to help the middle class, I’ll use it.  Where Ican’t act on my own and Congress isn’t cooperating, I’ll pick up the phone -- I’ll call CEOs; I’llcall philanthropists; I’ll call college presidents; I’ll call labor leaders.  I’ll call anybody who canhelp -- and enlist them in our efforts.
Because the choices that we, the people, make right now will determine whether or not everyAmerican has a fighting chance in the 21st century.  And it will lay the foundation for ourchildren’s future, our grandchildren’s future, for all Americans. So let me give you a quick preview of what I’ll be fighting for and why.  The first cornerstoneof a strong, growing middle class has to be, as I said before, an economy that generates moregood jobs in durable, growing industries.  That's how this area was built.  That's how Americaprospered.  Because anybody who was willing to work, they could go out there and they couldfind themselves a job, and they could build a life for themselves and their family. Now, over the past four years, for the first time since the 1990s, the number of Americanmanufacturing jobs has actually gone up instead of down.  That's the good news.   But we cando more.  So I’m going to push new initiatives to help more manufacturers bring more jobsback to the United States.  We’re going to continue to focus on strategies to make sure ourtax code rewards companies that are not shipping jobs overseas, but creating jobs right herein the United States of America.
We want to make sure that -- we’re going to create strategies to make sure that good jobs inwind and solar and natural gas that are lowering costs and, at the same time, reducingdangerous carbon pollution happen right here in the United States.
And something that Cheri and I were talking about on the way over here -- I’m going to bepushing to open more manufacturing innovation institutes that turn regions left behind byglobal competition into global centers of cutting-edge jobs.  So let’s tell the world thatAmerica is open for business.   I know there’s an old site right here in Galesburg, over onMonmouth Boulevard -- let’s put some folks to work. Tomorrow, I’ll also visit the Port of Jacksonville, Florida to offer new ideas for doing whatAmerica has always done best, which is building things.  Pat and I were talking before I came -- backstage -- Pat Quinn -- he was talking about how I came over the Don Moffitt Bridge. But we’ve got work to do all across the country.  We’ve got ports that aren’t ready for the newsupertankers that are going to begin passing through the new Panama Canal in two years’time.  If we don’t get that done, those tankers are going to go someplace else.  We’ve gotmore than 100,000 bridges that are old enough to qualify for Medicare.
Businesses depend on our transportation systems, on our power grids, on our communicationsnetworks.  And rebuilding them creates good-paying jobs right now that can’t be outsourced.
  
And by the way, this isn’t a Democratic idea.  Republicans built a lot of stuff.  This is the Landof Lincoln.  Lincoln was all about building stuff -- first Republican President.  And yet, as ashare of our economy, we invest less in our infrastructure than we did two decades ago.  Andthat’s inefficient at a time when it’s as cheap as it’s been since the 1950s to build things.  It’sinexcusable at a time when so many of the workers who build stuff for a living are sitting athome waiting for a call.  The longer we put this off, the more expensive it will be and the less competitive we will be. Businesses of tomorrow will not locate near old roads and outdated ports.  They’ll relocate toplaces with high-speed Internet, and high-tech schools, and systems that move air and autotraffic faster, and not to mention will get parents home quicker from work because we’ll beeliminating some of these traffic jams.  And we can watch all of that happen in othercountries, and start falling behind, or we can choose to make it happen right here, in theUnited States.
In an age when jobs know no borders, companies are also going to seek out the countries thatboast the most talented citizens, and they’ll reward folks who have the skills and the talentsthey need -- they’ll reward those folks with good pay.  The days when the wages for a worker with a high school degree could keep pace with theearnings of somebody who got some sort of higher education -- those days are over. Everybody here knows that.  There are a whole bunch of folks here whose dads or grandpasworked at a plant, didn’t need a high school education. You could just go there.  If you werewilling to work hard, you might be able to get two jobs.  And you could support your family,have a vacation, own your home.  But technology and global competition, they’re not goingaway.  Those old days aren’t coming back.  So we can either throw up our hands and resign ourselves to diminishing living standards, orwe can do what America has always done, which is adapt, and pull together, and fight back,and win.  That’s what we have to do.
And that brings me to the second cornerstone of a strong middle class -- and everybody hereknows it -- an education that prepares our children and our workers for the global competitionthat they’re going to face.  And if you think education is expensive, wait until you see howmuch ignorance costs in the 21st century.
If we don’t make this investment, we’re going to put our kids, our workers, and our country ata competitive disadvantage for decades.  So we have to begin in the earliest years.  And that’swhy I’m going to keep pushing to make high-quality preschool available for every 4-year-oldin America.  Not just because we know it works for our kids, but because it provides a vitalsupport system for working parents.  
  
And I’m going to take action in the education area to spur innovation that don’t requireCongress.  So, today, for example, as we speak, federal agencies are moving on my plan toconnect 99 percent of America’s students to high-speed Internet over the next five years. We’re making that happen right now.   We’ve already begun meeting with business leadersand tech entrepreneurs and innovative educators to identify the best ideas for redesigning ourhigh schools so that they teach the skills required for a high-tech economy.   And we’re also going to keep pushing new efforts to train workers for changing jobs.  So herein Galesburg, for example, a lot of the workers that were laid off at Maytag chose to enroll inretraining programs like the one at Carl Sandburg College.  And while it didn’t pay off foreveryone, a lot of the folks who were retrained found jobs that suited them even better andpaid even more than the ones they had lost.  And that’s why I’ve asked Congress to start a Community College to Career initiative, so thatworkers can earn the skills that high-tech jobs demand without leaving their hometown.  AndI’m going to challenge CEOs from some of America’s best companies to hire more Americanswho’ve got what it takes to fill that job opening but have been laid off for so long that nobodyis giving their résumé an honest look.  Audience Member:  More talent! President Obama:  That, too. I’m also going to use the power of my office over the next few months to highlight a topicthat’s straining the budgets of just about every American family -- and that’s the soaring costof higher education.  Everybody is touched by this, including your President, who had a wholebunch of loans he had to pay off.
Three years ago, I worked with Democrats to reform the student loan system so that taxpayerdollars stopped padding the pockets of big banks, and instead helped more kids affordcollege.  Then, I capped loan repayments at 10 percent of monthly incomes for responsibleborrowers, so that if somebody graduated and they decided to take a teaching job, forexample, that didn’t pay a lot of money, they knew that they were never going to have to paymore than 10 percent of their income and they could afford to go into a profession that theyloved.  That’s in place right now.  And this week, we’re working with both parties to reversethe doubling of student loan rates that happened a few weeks ago because of congressionalinaction.
So this is all a good start -- but it isn’t enough.  Families and taxpayers can’t just keep payingmore and more and more into an undisciplined system where costs just keep on going up andup and up.  We’ll never have enough loan money, we’ll never have enough grant money, tokeep up with costs that are going up 5, 6, 7 percent a year.  We’ve got to get more out ofwhat we pay for.  
  
Now, some colleges are testing new approaches to shorten the path to a degree, or blendingteaching with online learning to help students master material and earn credits in less time. In some states, they’re testing new ways to fund college based not just on how manystudents enroll, but how many of them graduate, how well did they do.  So this afternoon, I’ll visit the University of Central Missouri to highlight their efforts to delivermore bang for the buck to their students.  And in the coming months, I will lay out anaggressive strategy to shake up the system, tackle rising costs, and improve value for middle-
class students and their families.  It is critical that we make sure that college is affordable forevery single American who’s willing to work for it.
Now, so you’ve got a good job; you get a good education -- those have always been the keystepping stones into the middle class.  But a home of your own has always been the clearestexpression of middle-class security.  For most families, that’s your biggest asset.  For mostfamilies, that’s where your life’s work has been invested.  And that changed during the crisis,when we saw millions of middle-class families experience their home values plummeting.  Thegood news is over the past four years, we’ve helped more responsible homeowners stay intheir homes.  And today, sales are up and prices are up, and fewer Americans see their homesunderwater. But we’re not done yet.  The key now is to encourage homeownership that isn’t based onunrealistic bubbles, but instead is based on a solid foundation, where buyers and lenders playby the same set of rules, rules that are clear and transparent and fair.  So already, I’ve asked Congress to pass a really good, bipartisan idea -- one that waschampioned, by the way, by Mitt Romney’s economic advisor -- and this is the idea to giveevery homeowner the chance to refinance their mortgage while rates are still low so they cansave thousands of dollars a year.  It will be like a tax cut for families who can refinance.  I’m also acting on my own to cut red tape for responsible families who want to get a mortgagebut the bank is saying no.  We’ll work with both parties to turn the page on Fannie Mae andFreddie Mac, and build a housing finance system that’s rock-solid for future generations. So we’ve got more work to do to strengthen homeownership in this country.  But along withhomeownership, the fourth cornerstone of what it means to be middle class in this country isa secure retirement.  I hear from too many people across the country, face to face or inletters that they send me, that they feel as if retirement is just receding from their grasp.  It’sgetting farther and farther away.  They can't see it.  Now, today, a rising stock market has millions of retirement balances going up, and some ofthe losses that had taken place during the financial crisis have been recovered.  But we stilllive with an upside-down system where those at the top, folks like me, get generous taxincentives to save, while tens of millions of hardworking Americans who are struggling, theyget none of those breaks at all.
  
So as we work to reform our tax code, we should find new ways to make it easier for workersto put away money, and free middle-class families from the fear that they won't be able toretire.
And if Congress is looking for a bipartisan place to get started, I should just say they don’thave to look far.  We mentioned immigration reform before.  Economists show thatimmigration reform makes undocumented workers pay their full share of taxes, and thatactually shores up the Social Security system for years.  So we should get that done. Good job; good education for your kids; home of your own; secure retirement.  Fifth, I'm going to keep focusing on health care -- because middle-class families and smallbusiness owners deserve the security of knowing that neither an accident or an illness is goingto threaten the dreams that you’ve worked a lifetime to build.  As we speak, we're well on our way to fully implementing the Affordable Care Act.  We'regoing to implement it.  Now, if you’re one of the 85 percent of Americans who already havehealth insurance either through the job or Medicare or Medicaid, you don’t have to doanything, but you do have new benefits and better protections than you did before.  You maynot know it, but you do.  Free checkups, mammograms, discounted medicines if you're onMedicare -- that’s what the Affordable Care Act means.  You're already getting a better deal. No lifetime limits. If you don’t have health insurance, then starting on October 1st, private plans will actuallycompete for your business, and you'll be able to comparison-shop online.  There will be amarketplace online, just like you’d buy a flat-screen TV or plane tickets or anything elseyou're doing online, and you'll be able to buy an insurance package that fits your budget andis right for you.  And if you're one of the up to half of all Americans who’ve been sick or have a preexistingcondition -- if you look at this auditorium, about half of you probably have a preexistingcondition that insurance companies could use to not give you insurance if you lost your job orlost your insurance -- well, this law means that beginning January 1st, insurance companieswill finally have to cover you and charge you the same rates as everybody else, even if youhave a preexisting condition.  That’s what the Affordable Care Act does.  That’s what it does.
Now, look, I know because I've been living it that there are folks out there who are activelyworking to make this law fail.  And I don’t always understand exactly what their logic is here,why they think giving insurance to folks who don’t have it and making folks with insurance alittle more secure, why they think that’s a bad thing.  But despite the politically motivatedmisinformation campaign, the states that have committed themselves to making this law workare finding that competition and choice are actually pushing costs down. 
  
So just last week, New York announced that premiums for consumers who buy their insurancein these online marketplaces will be at least 50 percent lower than what they're paying today -
- 50 percent lower.  So folks' premiums in the individual market will drop by 50 percent.  Andfor them and for the millions of Americans who’ve been able to cover their sick kids for thefirst time -- like this gentlemen who just said his daughter has got health insurance -- or havebeen able to cover their employees more cheaply, or are able to have their kids who areyounger than -- who are 25 or 26 stay on their parents' plan -- for all those folks, you'll havethe security of knowing that everything you’ve worked hard for is no longer one illness awayfrom being wiped out.
Finally, as we work to strengthen these cornerstones of middle-class security -- good job withdecent wages and benefits, a good education, home of your own, retirement security, healthcare security -- I’m going to make the case for why we've got to rebuild ladders of opportunityfor all those Americans who haven't quite made it yet -- who are working hard but are stillsuffering poverty wages, who are struggling to get full-time work.
There are a lot of folks who are still struggling out here, too many people in poverty.  Here inAmerica, we’ve never guaranteed success -- that's not what we do.  More than some othercountries, we expect people to be self-reliant.  Nobody is going to do something for you. We've tolerated a little more inequality for the sake of a more dynamic, more adaptableeconomy.  That's all for the good.  But that idea has always been combined with acommitment to equality of opportunity to upward mobility -- the idea that no matter how pooryou started, if you're willing to work hard and discipline yourself and defer gratification, youcan make it, too.  That's the American idea.
Unfortunately, opportunities for upward mobility in America have gotten harder to find overthe past 30 years.  And that’s a betrayal of the American idea.  And that’s why we have to doa lot more to give every American the chance to work their way into the middle class. The best defense against all of these forces -- global competition, economic polarization -- isthe strength of the community.  So we need a new push to rebuild rundown neighborhoods. We need new partnerships with some of the hardest-hit towns in America to get them back ontheir feet.  And because no one who works full-time in America should have to live in poverty,I am going to keep making the case that we need to raise the minimum wage -- because it'slower right now than it was when Ronald Reagan took office.  It's time for the minimum wageto go up.
We're not a people who allow chance of birth to decide life’s biggest winners or losers.  Andafter years in which we’ve seen how easy it can be for any of us to fall on hard times -- folksin Galesburg, folks in the Quad Cities, you know there are good people who work hard andsometimes they get a bad break.  A plant leaves.  Somebody gets sick.  Somebody loses ahome.  We've seen it in our family, in our friends and our neighbors.  We've seen it happen. And that means we cannot turn our backs when bad breaks hit any of our fellow citizens. 
  
So good jobs; a better bargain for the middle class and the folks who are working to get intothe middle class; an economy that grows from the middle out, not the top down -- that'swhere I will focus my energies.  That's where I will focus my energies not just for the next fewmonths, but for the remainder of my presidency.  These are the plans that I'll lay out across this country.  But I won’t be able to do it alone, soI'm going to be calling on all of us to take up this cause.  We’ll need our businesses, who aresome of the best in the world, to pressure Congress to invest in our future.  And I’ll be askingour businesses to set an example by providing decent wages and salaries to their ownemployees.  And I’m going to highlight the ones that do just that.  There are companies like Costco, which pays good wages and offers good benefits. Companies like -- there are companies like the Container Store, that prides itself on trainingits employees and on employee satisfaction -- because these companies prove that it’s notjust good for the employees, it’s good for their businesses to treat workers well.  It’s good forAmerica.
So I’m going to be calling on the private sector to step up. I will be saying to Democrats we’vegot to question some of our old assumptions.  We’ve got to be willing to redesign or get rid ofprograms that don't work as well as they should.  We’ve got to be willing to -- we’ve got toembrace changes to cherished priorities so that they work better in this new age.  We can'tjust -- Democrats can't just stand pat and just defend whatever government is doing.  If webelieve that government can give the middle class a fair shot in this new century -- and Ibelieve that -- we’ve an obligation to prove it.  And that means that we’ve got to be open tonew ways of doing things. And we’ll need Republicans in Congress to set aside short-term politics and work with me tofind common ground.
It’s interesting, in the run-up to this speech, a lot of reporters say that, well, Mr. President,these are all good ideas, but some of you’ve said before; some of them sound great, but youcan't get those through Congress.  Republicans won’t agree with you.  And I say, look, thefact is there are Republicans in Congress right now who privately agree with me on a lot of theideas I’ll be proposing.  I know because they’ve said so.  But they worry they’ll face swiftpolitical retaliation for cooperating with me. Now, there are others who will dismiss every idea I put forward either because they’re playingto their most strident supporters, or in some cases because, sincerely, they have afundamentally different vision for America -- one that says inequality is both inevitable andjust; one that says an unfettered free market without any restraints inevitably produces thebest outcomes, regardless of the pain and uncertainty imposed on ordinary families; andgovernment is the problem and we should just shrink it as small as we can. 
  
In either case, I say to these members of Congress:  I’m laying out my ideas to give themiddle class a better shot.  So now it’s time for you to lay out your ideas.  You can't just beagainst something.  You got to be for something.
Even if you think I’ve done everything wrong, the trends I just talked about were happeningwell before I took office.  So it’s not enough for you just to oppose me.  You got to be forsomething.  What are your ideas?  If you’re willing to work with me to strengthen Americanmanufacturing and rebuild this country’s infrastructure, let’s go.  If you’ve got better ideas tobring down the cost of college for working families, let’s hear them.  If you think you have abetter plan for making sure that every American has the security of quality, affordable healthcare, then stop taking meaningless repeal votes, and share your concrete ideas with thecountry.
Repealing Obamacare and cutting spending is not an economic plan.  It’s not. If you’re serious about a balanced, long-term fiscal plan that replaces the mindless cutscurrently in place, or if you’re interested in tax reform that closes corporate loopholes andgives working families a better deal, I’m ready to work.  But you should know that I will notaccept deals that don’t meet the basic test of strengthening the prospects of hardworkingfamilies.  This is the agenda we have to be working on.
We’ve come a long way since I first took office.   As a country, we’re older and wiser.  I don’tknow if I’m wiser, but I’m certainly older.  And as long as Congress doesn’t manufactureanother crisis -- as long as we don’t shut down the government just because I’m for keeping itopen -- as long as we don’t risk a U.S. default over paying bills that we’ve already racked up,something that we’ve never done -- we can probably muddle along without taking boldaction.  If we stand pat and we don’t do any of the things I talked about, our economy willgrow, although slower than it should.  New businesses will form.  The unemployment rate willprobably tick down a little bit.  Just by virtue of our size and our natural resources and, mostof all, because of the talent of our people, America will remain a world power, and themajority of us will figure out how to get by. But you know what, that’s our choice.  If we just stand by and do nothing in the face ofimmense change, understand that part of our character will be lost.  Our founding preceptsabout wide-open opportunity, each generation doing better than the last -- that will be amyth, not reality.  The position of the middle class will erode further.  Inequality will continueto increase. Money’s power will distort our politics even more.  Social tensions will rise, as various groups fight to hold on to what they have, or start blamingsomebody else for why their position isn’t improving.  And the fundamental optimism that’salways propelled us forward will give way to cynicism or nostalgia. 
  
And that’s not the vision I have for this country.  It’s not the vision you have for this country. That’s not the America we know.  That’s not the vision we should be settling for.  That’s not avision we should be passing on to our children.  I have now run my last campaign.  I do not intend to wait until the next campaign or the nextPresident before tackling the issues that matter.  I care about one thing and one thing only,and that’s how to use every minute -- the only thing I care about is how to use every minuteof the remaining 1,276 days of my term -- to make this country work for working Americansagain.  That’s all I care about.  I don’t have another election.
Because I’ll tell you, Galesburg, that’s where I believe America needs to go.  I believe that’swhere the American people want to go.  And it may seem hard today, but if we’re willing totake a few bold steps -- if Washington will just shake off its complacency and set aside thekind of slash-and-burn partisanship that we’ve just seen for way too long -- if we just makesome common-sense decisions, our economy will be stronger a year from now.  It will bestronger five years from now.  It will be stronger 10 years from now.
If we focus on what matters, then more Americans will know the pride of that first paycheck. More Americans will have the satisfaction of flipping the sign to “Open” on their own business. More Americans will have the joy of scratching the height of their kid on that door of theirbrand-new home.
And in the end, isn't that what makes us special?  It's not the ability to generate incrediblewealth for the few; it's our ability to give everybody a chance to pursue their own truemeasure of happiness.  We haven’t just wanted success for ourselves -- we want it for ourneighbors, too.
When we think about our own communities -- we're not a mean people; we're not a selfishpeople; we're not a people that just looks out for “number one.”  Why should our politicsreflect those kinds of values?  That’s why we don’t call it John’s dream or Susie’s dream orBarack’s dream or Pat's dream -- we call it the American Dream.  And that’s what makes thiscountry special  -- the idea that no matter who you are or what you look like or where youcome from or who you love, you can make it if you try.  That’s what we're fighting for.
So, yes, Congress is tough right now, but that’s not going to stop me.  We're going to doeverything we can, wherever we can, with or without Congress, to make things happen. We're going to go on the road and talk to you, and you'll have ideas, and we want to seewhich ones we can implement.  But we're going to focus on this thing that matters. One of America’s greatest writers, Carl Sandburg, born right here in Galesburg over a centuryago -- he saw the railroads bring the world to the prairie, and then the prairie sent out itsbounty to the world.  And he saw the advent of new industries, new technologies, and hewatched populations shift.  He saw fortunes made and lost.  And he saw how change could bepainful -- how a new age could unsettle long-held customs and ways of life.
  
But he had that frontier optimism, and so he saw something more on the horizon.  And hewrote, “I speak of new cities and new people.  The past is a bucket of ashes.  Yesterday is awind gone down, a sun dropped in the west.  There is only an ocean of tomorrows, a sky oftomorrows.” Well, America, we’ve made it through the worst of yesterday’s winds.  We just have to havethe courage to keep moving forward.  We've got to set our eyes on the horizon.  We will findan ocean of tomorrows.  We will find a sky of tomorrows for the American people and for thisgreat country that we love. So thank you.  God bless you.  And God bless the United States of America.
