Good morning, everybody. The United States of America is the greatest force for freedom andsecurity that the world has ever known. And in no small measure, that's because we've builtthe best-trained, best-led, best-equipped military in history -- and as Commander-in-Chief,I'm going to keep it that way.
Indeed, all of us on this stage -- every single one of us -- have a profound responsibility toevery soldier, sailor, airman, Marine and Coast Guardsman who puts their life on the line forAmerica. We owe them a strategy with well-defined goals; to only send them into harm's waywhen it's absolutely necessary; to give them the equipment and the support that they need toget the job done; and to care for them and their families when they come home. That is oursolemn obligation.
And over the past three years, that's what we've done. We've continued to make historicinvestments in our military -- our troops and their capabilities, our military families and ourveterans. And thanks to their extraordinary service, we've ended our war in Iraq. We'vedecimated al Qaeda's leadership. We've delivered justice to Osama bin Laden, and we've putthat terrorist network on the path to defeat. We've made important progress in Afghanistan,and we've begun to transition so Afghans can assume more responsibility for their ownsecurity. We joined allies and partners to protect the Libyan people as they ended the regimeof Muammar Qaddafi.
  
Now we're turning the page on a decade of war. Three years ago, we had some 180,000troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. Today, we've cut that number in half. And as the transition inAfghanistan continues, more of our troops will continue to come home. More broadly, aroundthe globe we've strengthened alliances, forged new partnerships, and served as a force foruniversal rights and human dignity. In short, we've succeeded in defending our nation, takingthe fight to our enemies, reducing the number of Americans in harm's way, and we'verestored America's global leadership.
That makes us safer and it makes us stronger. And that's an achievement that everyAmerican -- especially those Americans who are proud to wear the uniform of the UnitedStates Armed Forces -- should take great pride in. This success has brought our nation, oncemore, to a moment of transition. Even as our troops continue to fight in Afghanistan, the tideof war is receding. Even as our forces prevail in today's missions, we have the opportunity --and the responsibility -- to look ahead to the force that we are going to need in the future.
At the same time, we have to renew our economic strength here at home, which is thefoundation of our strength around the world. And that includes putting our fiscal house inorder. To that end, the Budget Control Act passed by Congress last year -- with the support ofRepublicans and Democrats alike -- mandates reductions in federal spending, includingdefense spending. I've insisted that we do that responsibly. The security of our nation and thelives of our men and women in uniform depend on it.
That's why I called for this comprehensive defense review -- to clarify our strategic interestsin a fast-changing world, and to guide our defense priorities and spending over the comingdecade -- because the size and the structure of our military and defense budgets have to bedriven by a strategy, not the other way around. Moreover, we have to remember the lessonsof history. We can't afford to repeat the mistakes that have been made in the past -- afterWorld War II, after Vietnam -- when our military was left ill prepared for the future. AsCommander in Chief, I will not let that happen again. Not on my watch.
We need a start -- We need a smart, strategic set of priorities. The new guidance that theDefense Department is releasing today does just that. I want to thank Secretary Panetta andGeneral Dempsey for their extraordinary leadership during this process. I want to thank theservice secretaries and chiefs, the combatant commanders and so many defense leaders --military and civilian, active, Guard and reserve -- for their contributions. Many of us metrepeatedly -- asking tough questions, challenging our own assumptions and making hardchoices. And we've come together today around an approach that will keep our nation safeand our military the finest that the world have ever known.
This review also benefits from the contributions of leaders from across my national securityteam -- from the departments of State, Homeland Security and Veterans Affairs, as well asthe intelligence community. And this is critical, because meeting the challenges of our timecannot be the work of our military alone -- or the United States alone. It requires all elementsof our national power, working together in concert with our allies and our partners.
  
So I'm going to let Leon and Marty go into the details. But I just want to say that this effortreflects the guidance that I personally gave throughout this process. Yes, the tide of war isreceding. But the question that this strategy answers is what kind of military will we need longafter the wars of the last decade are over. And today, we're fortunate to be moving forwardfrom a position of strength.
As I made clear in Australia, we will be strengthening our presence in the Asia Pacific, andbudget reductions will not come at the expense of that critical region. We're going to continueinvesting in our critical partnerships and alliances, including NATO, which has demonstratedtime and again -- most recently in Libya -- that it's a force multiplier. We will stay vigilant,especially in the Middle East.
As we look beyond the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan -- and the end of long-term nation-
building with large military footprints -- we'll be able to ensure our security with smallerconventional ground forces. We'll continue to get rid of outdated Cold War-era systems so thatwe can invest in the capabilities that we need for the future, including intelligence,surveillance and reconnaissance, counterterrorism, countering weapons of mass destructionand the ability to operate in environments where adversaries try to deny us access.
So, yes, our military will be leaner, but the world must know the United States is going tomaintain our military superiority with armed forces that are agile, flexible and ready for thefull range of contingencies and threats.
We're also going to keep faith with those who serve, by making sure our troops have theequipment and capabilities they need to succeed, and by prioritizing efforts that focus onwounded warriors, mental health and the well-being of our military families. And as ournewest veterans rejoin civilian life, we'll keep working to give our veterans the care, thebenefits and job opportunities that they deserve and that they have earned.
Finally, although today is about our defense strategy, I want to close with a word about thedefense budget that will flow from this strategy. The details will be announced in the comingweeks. Some will no doubt say that the spending reductions are too big; others will say thatthey're too small. It will be easy to take issue with a particular change in a particular program.But I'd encourage all of us to remember what President Eisenhower once said -- that "eachproposal must be weighed in the light of a broader consideration: the need to maintainbalance in and among national programs." After a decade of war, and as we rebuild the sourceof our strength -- at home and abroad -- it's time to restore that balance.
I think it's important for all Americans to remember, over the past 10 years, since 9/11, ourdefense budget grew at an extraordinary pace. Over the next 10 years, the growth in thedefense budget will slow, but the fact of the matter is this: It will still grow, because we haveglobal responsibilities that demand our leadership.
  
In fact, the defense budget will still be larger than it was toward the end of the BushAdministration. And I firmly believe, and I think the American people understand, that we cankeep our military strong and our nation secure with a defense budget that continues to belarger than roughly the next 10 countries combined.
So again, I want to thank Secretary Panetta, Chairman Dempsey, all the defense leaders whoare on this stage, and some who are absent, for their leadership and their partnershipthroughout this process. Our men and women in uniform give their very best to America everysingle day, and in return they deserve the very best from America. And I thank all of you forthe commitment to the goal that we all share: keeping America strong and secure in the 21stcentury, and keeping our Armed Forces the very best in the world.
And with that, I will turn this discussion over to Leon and to Marty, who can explain more andtake your questions.
So thank you very much. I understand this is the first time a President has done this. It's apretty nice room.
Thank you, guys.
