Mr. President, I rise, first, to offer strong words of support for the statement that was justoffered by the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts. I, as well, rise today to speak insupport of the Iraq resolution that the Senate will consider tomorrow.
Mr. President, the news from Iraq is very bad. Last week, a suicide bomber stood outside abookstore and killed 20 people. Other attacks killed 118 Shia pilgrims. On Sunday, a car bombwent off in central Baghdad, and more than 30 people died. And the road from the airport intoBaghdad is littered with smoldering debris, craters from improvised explosive devices, and thememories of our sons and daughters.
Mr. President, the civil war in Iraq rages on. The insurgents have started to change theirtactics. They hide in buildings and along the streets and wait for our helicopters. They've shotdown at least eight U.S. helicopters in the last month. More of our soldiers are dying andcoming home with their bodies broken and their nerves shattered at a VA system completelyunprepared for what they need to rebuild their lives.

Mr. President, it is not enough for the President to tell us that victory in this war is simply amatter of American resolve. The American people have been extraordinarily resolved. They'veseen their sons and daughters killed or wounded in the streets of Fallujah. They've spenthundreds of billions of dollars on this effort -- money that they know could have been devotedto strengthening our homeland security and our competitive standing as a Nation. The failurehas not been a failure of resolve. That's not what's led us into chaos. It's been a failure ofstrategy; and it's time that the strategy change. There is no military solution, Mr. President, tothe civil war that rages on in Iraq; and it's time for us to redeploy so that a political solutionbecomes possible.
The news from Iraq is very bad, and it's been that way for at least four years. We all wish the-- that the land the President and the Vice President speak of exists. We wish that there wasan Iraq where the insurgency was in the last throes, where the people work with security,where children play outside, where a vibrant new democracy lights up the nighttime sky. Wewish for those things, but there's no alternative reality to what we see and read about in thenews, to what we've experienced these long four years.
I repeat, Mr. President, there is no military solution to this war. At this point, no amount ofsoldiers can solve the grievances at the heart of someone else's civil war. The Iraqi people --Shia, Sunni, and Kurd -- must come to the table and reach a political settlement themselves.If they want peace, they must do the hard work necessary to achieve it.
Our failed strategy in Iraq has strengthened Iran's strategic position, reduced U.S. credibilityand influence around the world, placed Israel and other nations friendly to the United Statesin the region in greater peril. These are not the signs of a well-laid plan. It's time for aprofound change.
This is what we're trying to do here today. We're saying it is time to start making plans toredeploy our troops so that they can focus on the wider struggle against terrorism, win thewar in Afghanistan, strengthen our position in the Middle East, and pressure the Iraqis toreach a political settlement. Even if this effort falls short, we will continue to try to accomplishwhat the American people asked for last November.
I'm glad to see, though, that this new effort is gaining consensus. And I want to commendSenator Reid for his efforts. He took the time to listen -- so many of us from both Chambersof Congress could help develop this plan.
The decision in particular to begin a phased redeployment, with the goal of redeploying all ourcombat forces by March 31st, 2008, is the right step. It's a measure the Iraq Study Groupspoke of, an idea I borrowed from them, an idea that, in a bill I introduced, now has morethan 60 cosponsors from House and Senate and from both sides of the aisle. They'vesupported this plan since I announced a similar plan in January.

The decision allows some U.S. forces to remain in Iraq with a clear mission to protect U.S. andcoalition personnel, conduct counterterrorism operations, and to train and equip Iraqi forces;and that is a smart decision. President al-Maliki spoke at a conference and warned that theviolence in Iraq could spread throughout the region if it goes unchecked. By maintaining astrong presence in Iraq and the Middle East, as both my bill and the leadership bill does, wecan ensure that the chaos does not spread.
I should also add that the decision to begin this phased redeployment within 120 days is apractical one. Our military options have been exhausted. It's time to seek a political solutionto this war, and with this decision we send a clear signal to the parties involved that they needto arrive at an accommodation.
Mr. President, while I strongly believe that this war never should have been authorized, Ibelieve we must be as careful in ending the war as we were careless getting in. While I prefermy approach, as reflected in my bill, I believe that this new resolution does begin to pointU.S. policy in Iraq and the region in the right direction. An end to the war, and achieving apolitical solution to Iraq's civil war, will not happen unless we demand it.
Peace with stability doesn't just happen because we wish for it. It comes when we never givein and never give up and never tire of working towards a life on Earth worthy of our humandignity. The decisions that have been made have led us to this crossroads -- a moment ofgreat peril, Mr. President.
We have a choice. We can continue down the road that's weakened our credibility anddamaged our strategic interests in the region or we can turn toward the future. The roadwon't be smooth, and I have to say, Mr. President, that there will be risks with any approach.But this approach is our last best hope to end this war so we can begin to bring our troopshome and begin the hard work of securing our country and our world from the threats that weface.
The President has said he will continue down the road towards more troops and more of thesame failed policies. The President sought and won authorization from Congress to wage thiswar from the start. But he is now dismissing and ignoring the will of the American people, thatis tired of years of watching the human and financial tolls mount.
Mr. President, the news from Iraq is very bad, but it can change if we in this Chamber say"enough." Let this day be the day that begins the painful and difficult work of moving fromthis crossroad. Let this be the day that we begin pulling towards the future with a responsibleconclusion to this painful chapter in our Nation's history. Mr. President, let this be the daywhen we finally send a message that is so clear and so emphatic that it cannot be ignored.
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the floor.