Welcome to the White House.  First of all, I want to thank Antonio for being such anoutstanding role model.  Back in 2011 -- when he was much shorter -- I visited KenmoreMiddle School and saw firsthand their great work helping students like Antonio achieve theirpotential.  And that’s why we’re here today.  
This is an early Christmas present. After more than 10 years, members of Congress from bothparties have come together to revise our national education law.  A Christmas miracle:  Abipartisan bill signing right here.  So I was telling Lamar we should do this more often.  I loveit when we’re signing bipartisan bills.  Today, I’m proud to sign a law that’s going to makesure that every student is prepared to succeed in the 21st century.  
The goals of No Child Left Behind, the predecessor of this law, were the right ones:  Highstandards.  Accountability.  Closing the achievement gap.  Making sure that every child waslearning, not just some.  But in practice, it often fell short.  It didn’t always consider thespecific needs of each community.  It led to too much testing during classroom time.  It oftenforced schools and school districts into cookie-cutter reforms that didn’t always produce thekinds of results that we wanted to see.  And that’s okay -- sometimes reform efforts requireyou try something, it doesn’t work, you learn some lessons, and you make modifications.    
  
So my Administration, when we came into office, tried some different things.  We tried to leada Race to the Top.  That’s why we acted to give states that were willing to embrace reforms --that they helped to formulate -- more flexibility in how to improve student achievement.  Theywere receiving waivers from some of the requirements of No Child Left Behind.  But the truthis that could only do so much.  And that’s why, for years, I have called on Congress to cometogether and get a bipartisan effort to fix No Child Left Behind.  
It took a lot of time; it required a lot of work.  But thanks to the tireless efforts of many of thepeople on this stage and some people who are in attendance here today, we finally reachedthat deal.  
There are some people that I especially want to thank.  First of all, Senators Lamar Alexanderand Patty Murray on the Senate side, and Representatives John Kline and Bobby Scott on theHouse side, as well as their dedicated staffs.  This would not have happened without them.
And I just want to point out that it’s not as if there weren’t some significant ideologicaldifferences on some of these issues.  No, there were, but I think this is really a good exampleof how bipartisanship can work.  People did not agree on everything at the outset, but theywere willing to listen to each other in a civil, constructive way, and to work through theseissues, compromise where necessary, while still keeping their eye on the ball.  And I think it’sreally a testament of the four leaders of the respective committees that they set that kind oftone.  And that’s something that we don’t always see here in Washington.  There wasn’t a lotof grandstanding, not a lot of posturing -- just a lot of really good, hard work.  So I just wantto, again, thank them for the outstanding work that they did.
I also want to thank my outgoing Secretary of Education Arne Duncan.  Arne has dedicatedhis life to the cause of education -- and sometimes in the nicest possible way, he has gottenon people’s nerves because he has pushed them and prodded them and tried to make surethat we set high expectations and that we are holding ourselves accountable for children’sperformance -- or the school’s performance and how they were delivering for our kids.  Andhad he not been, I believe, as tenacious as he was, I think that we would not have as good ofa product as we do here today.  And so I could not be prouder of Arne Duncan.  And I wantacknowledge him.
We are going to miss Arne Duncan a lot.  Fortunately, in addition to some great staff that heassembled that is going to be staying on, we also have a great replacement for Arne in Dr.John King, who is going to be doing outstanding work helping to implement this.
In addition, obviously we’ve had some outstanding advocates. We’ve got our teachers unions,we’ve got our civil rights organizations, we’ve got philanthropies -- all of who -- communitygroups -- who have been active and involved, and the governors organizations and schooldistricts have also been involved, the superintendants.  So we want to thank all them for theircontributions.  All the stakeholders have really buckled down to make this day possible.
  
And the law comes at an important moment.  Over the past seven years, the good news isthat our students have made real strides.  We’ve seen states raise academic expectations forall students.  That means that we’re in a better position to    out-teach and out-compete othernations at a time when knowledge is really the single-biggest determinant of economicperformance. High school graduation rates have reached an all-time high; dropout rates havehit historic lows.  The number of high schools so bad they’re called “dropout factories” hasbeen cut almost in half.  We’re training tens of thousands of outstanding math and scienceteachers.  More students are graduating from college than ever before, and more than amillion additional black and Hispanic students are now going to college.  
So there is some real good work that’s been done, a foundation to build from.  But we’re herebecause we all know that there’s a lot more work to be done.  As wonderful as Antonio’sschool is, as wonderful as a learning experience is as a lot of our young people are receiving,we know that there are other schools that just aren’t hitting the mark yet.  And in today’seconomy, a high-quality education is a prerequisite for success.  
We’re going to have to have our young people master not just the basics but also becomecritical thinkers and creative problem solvers.  And our competitive advantage depends onwhether our kids are prepared to seize the opportunities for tomorrow.  So we need to buildon the momentum that has already been established. We’ve got to learn what works and domore of that, and we’ve got to get rid of the stuff that doesn’t work.   And that’s exactly whatthe Every Student Succeeds Act does.  
First, this law focuses on a national goal of ensuring that all of our students graduate preparedfor college and future careers.  It builds on the reforms that have helped us make so muchprogress already, holding everybody to high standards for teaching and learning, empoweringstates and school districts to develop their own strategies for improvement, dedicatingresources to our most vulnerable children.  And this law requires states to invest in helpingstudents and schools improve, and focusing on the lowest-performing schools and closingthose big achievement gaps.
Second, this bill makes long-overdue fixes to the last education law, replacing the one-size-
fits-all approach to reform with a commitment to provide every student with a well-roundededucation.  It creates real partnerships between the states, which will have new flexibility totailor their improvement plans, and the federal government, which will have the oversight tomake sure that the plans are sound.
It helps states and districts reduce unnecessary standardized tests -- something we talkedabout a couple of months ago, because what we want to do is to get rid of unnecessarystandardized tests so that more teachers can spend time engaging in student learning while,at the same time, making sure that parents and teachers have clear information on theirchildren’s academic performance.
  
Number three, we know that the early years can make a huge difference in a child’s life, sothis law lays the foundation to expand access to high-quality preschools, and it createsincentives for innovative approaches to learning and for supporting great teachers.  
And finally, this bill upholds the core value that animated the original Elementary andSecondary Education Act signed by President Lyndon Johnson -- the value that sayseducation, the key to economic opportunity, is a civil right.  With this bill, we reaffirm thatfundamental American ideal that every child, regardless of race, income, background, the zipcode where they live, deserves the chance to make out of their lives what they will.
So this is a big step in the right direction, a true bipartisan effort, a reminder of what can bedone when people enter into these issues in a spirit of listening and compromise. But, ofcourse, now the hard work begins.  Laws are only as good as the implementation.  And thatmeans that we’re going to have to be engaging with the schools and communities all acrossthe country, educators, school leaders, families, students, elected officials, communityleaders, philanthropies -- all to make the promise of this law reality.
And, by the way, it’s going to take students like Antonio.  He’s doing his part.  He’s takingadvanced classes to get a head start on high school credits.  He plays the violin.  He playssports.  He volunteers.  He owns one share of stock in Tesla.  So he’s clearly going places.  I’dinvest in him if I could.  But one of the reasons Antonio is thriving is he’s got great teachersand a great principal at Kenmore.  They saw that spark in him, and, like all great educators,they’re helping him to harness his energy and his curiosity and his talents.  
And that’s what we want every single child in America to have.  We just want to give them achance.  And so many of them are full of that same talent and drive, but we let them slipthrough the cracks, or we’re not creative enough in thinking about how they can be engaged,or they just don’t have the resources that they need in the classroom, or they fell behind earlybecause they didn’t get the support that they needed given the tough circumstances theywere born into.
And we want to make sure that through this piece of legislation, with our hard work, with ourfocus, with our discipline, with our passion, with our commitment, that every kid is given thesame opportunities that Antonio is getting.  I want this not just because it’s good for thestudents themselves, not just because it’s good for the communities involved, not onlybecause it’s good for our economy, but because it really goes to the essence of what we areabout as Americans.  
There was a time I think when upward mobility was the hallmark of America.  We’ve slippedon that front compared to other countries.  And some of it is because where we used to be sofar ahead of other countries in investing in education for every child, now on some indicators,we’ve been lagging behind.  Hopefully, this is going to get us back out front.
  
There’s nothing more essential to living up to the ideals of this nation than making sure everychild is able to achieve their God-given potential.  And I could not be prouder of the people onthis stage and those of you in the audience who helped us take just one step closer to thatreality.
So with that, let me sign this bill.
