Prime Minister Gillard, Leader Abbott, thank you both for your very warm welcome.  Mr.Speaker, Mr. President, members of the House and Senate, ladies and gentlemen, I thank youfor the honor of standing in this great chamber to reaffirm the bonds between the UnitedStates and the Commonwealth of Australia, two of the world’s oldest democracies and two ofthe world's oldest friends.
To you and the people of Australia, thank you for your extraordinary hospitality.  And here, inthis city -- this ancient “meeting place” -- I want to acknowledge the original inhabitants ofthis land, and one of the world’s oldest continuous cultures, the First Australians.
I first came to Australia as a child, traveling between my birthplace of Hawaii, and Indonesia,where I would live for four years.  As an eight-year-old, I couldn’t always understand yourforeign language. Last night I did try to talk some "Strine."  Today I don’t want to subject youto any earbashing.  I really do love that one and I will be introducing that into the vernacularin Washington.
But to a young American boy, Australia and its people -- your optimism, your easy-goingways, your irreverent sense of humor -- all felt so familiar.  It felt like home.  I’ve alwayswanted to return.  I tried last year -- twice.  But this is a Lucky Country, and today I feel luckyto be here as we mark the 60th anniversary of our unbreakable alliance.
  
The bonds between us run deep.  In each other’s story we see so much of ourselves. Ancestors who crossed vast oceans -- some by choice, some in chains.  Settlers who pushedwest across sweeping plains.  Dreamers who toiled with hearts and hands to lay railroads andto build cities.  Generations of immigrants who, with each new arrival, add a new thread tothe brilliant tapestry of our nations.  And we are citizens who live by a common creed -- nomatter who you are, no matter what you look like, everyone deserves a fair chance; everyonedeserves a fair go.
Of course, progress in our society has not always come without tensions, or struggles toovercome a painful past.  But we are countries with a willingness to face our imperfections,and to keep reaching for our ideals.  That’s the spirit we saw in this chamber three years ago,as this nation inspired the world with a historic gesture of reconciliation with IndigenousAustralians.  It’s the spirit of progress, in America, which allows me to stand before you today,as President of the United States.  And it’s the spirit I’ll see later today when I become thefirst U.S. President to visit the Northern Territory, where I’ll meet the Traditional Owners ofthe Land.
Nor has our progress come without great sacrifice.  This morning, I was humbled and deeplymoved by a visit to your war memorial to pay my respects to Australia’s fallen sons anddaughters.  Later today, in Darwin, I’ll join the Prime Minister in saluting our brave men andwomen in uniform.  And it will be a reminder that -- from the trenches of the First World Warto the mountains of Afghanistan -- Aussies and Americans have stood together, we havefought together, we have given lives together in every single major conflict of the pasthundred years.  Every single one.
This solidarity has sustained us through a difficult decade. We will never forget the attacks of9/11, that took the lives not only of Americans, but people from many nations, includingAustralia.  In the United States, we will never forget how Australia invoked the ANZUS Treaty-- for the first time ever -- showing that our two nations stood as one.  And none of us willever forget those we’ve lost to al Qaeda’s terror in the years since, including innocentAustralians.
And that’s why, as both the Prime Minister and the Opposition Leader indicated, we aredetermined to succeed in Afghanistan.  It is why I salute Australia -- outside of NATO, thelargest contributor of troops to this vital mission.  And it’s why we honor all those who haveserved there for our security, including 32 Australian patriots who gave their lives, amongthem Captain Bryce Duffy, Corporal Ashley Birt, and Lance Corporal Luke Gavin.  We willhonor their sacrifice by making sure that Afghanistan is never again used as a source forattacks against our people.  Never again. 
As two global partners, we stand up for the security and the dignity of people around theworld.  We see it when our rescue workers rush to help others in times of fire and drought andflooding rains.  We see it when we partner to keep the peace -- from East Timor to theBalkans -- and when we pursue our shared vision:  a world without nuclear weapons.
  
We see it in the development that lifts up a child in Africa; the assistance that saves a familyfrom famine; and when we extend our support to the people of the Middle East and NorthAfrica, who deserve the same liberty that allows us to gather in this great hall of democracy.
This is the alliance we reaffirm today -- rooted in our values; renewed by every generation. This is the partnership we worked to deepen over the past three years.  And today I can standbefore you and say with confidence that the alliance between the United States and Australiahas never been stronger. It has been to our past; our alliance continues to be indispensable toour future.  So here, among close friends, I’d like to address the larger purpose of my visit tothis region -- our efforts to advance security, prosperity and human dignity across the AsiaPacific.
For the United States, this reflects a broader shift.  After a decade in which we fought twowars that cost us dearly, in blood and treasure, the United States is turning our attention tothe vast potential of the Asia Pacific region.  In just a few weeks, after nearly nine years, thelast American troops will leave Iraq and our war there will be over.  In Afghanistan, we’vebegun a transition -- a responsible transition -- so Afghans can take responsibility for theirfuture and so coalition forces can begin to draw down.  And with partners like Australia, we’vestruck major blows against al Qaeda and put that terrorist organization on the path to defeat,including delivering justice to Osama bin Laden.
So make no mistake, the tide of war is receding, and America is looking ahead to the futurethat we must build.  From Europe to the Americas, we've strengthened alliances andpartnerships.  At home, we’re investing in the sources of our long-term economic strength --the education of our children, the training of our workers, the infrastructure that fuelscommerce, the science and the research that leads to new breakthroughs.  We’ve made harddecisions to cut our deficit and put our fiscal house in order -- and we will continue to domore.  Because our economic strength at home is the foundation of our leadership in theworld, including here in the Asia Pacific.  
Our new focus on this region reflects a fundamental truth -- the United States has been, andalways will be, a Pacific nation. Asian immigrants helped build America, and millions ofAmerican families, including my own, cherish our ties to this region.  From the bombing ofDarwin to the liberation of Pacific islands, from the rice paddies of Southeast Asia to a coldKorean Peninsula, generations of Americans have served here, and died here -- sodemocracies could take root; so economic miracles could lift hundreds of millions toprosperity.  Americans have bled with you for this progress, and we will not allow it -- we willnever allow it to be reversed.
Here, we see the future.  As the world’s fastest-growing region -- and home to more than halfthe global economy -- the Asia Pacific is critical to achieving my highest priority, and that'screating jobs and opportunity for the American people.  With most of the world’s nuclearpower and some half of humanity, Asia will largely define whether the century ahead will bemarked by conflict or cooperation, needless suffering or human progress. 
  
As President, I have, therefore, made a deliberate and strategic decision -- as a Pacific nation,the United States will play a larger and long-term role in shaping this region and its future, byupholding core principles and in close partnership with our allies and friends.
Let me tell you what this means.  First, we seek security, which is the foundation of peace andprosperity.  We stand for an international order in which the rights and responsibilities of allnations and all people are upheld.  Where international law and norms are enforced.  Wherecommerce and freedom of navigation are not impeded.  Where emerging powers contribute toregional security, and where disagreements are resolved peacefully.  That's the future that weseek.
Now, I know that some in this region have wondered about America’s commitment toupholding these principles.  So let me address this directly.  As the United States puts ourfiscal house in order, we are reducing our spending.  And, yes, after a decade of extraordinarygrowth in our military budgets -- and as we definitively end the war in Iraq, and begin to winddown the war in Afghanistan -- we will make some reductions in defense spending.
As we consider the future of our armed forces, we've begun a review that will identify ourmost important strategic interests and guide our defense priorities and spending over thecoming decade.  So here is what this region must know.  As we end today’s wars, I havedirected my national security team to make our presence and mission in the Asia Pacific a toppriority.  As a result, reductions in U.S. defense spending will not -- I repeat, will not -- comeat the expense of the Asia Pacific. 
My guidance is clear.  As we plan and budget for the future, we will allocate the resourcesnecessary to maintain our strong military presence in this region.  We will preserve our uniqueability to project power and deter threats to peace.  We will keep our commitments, includingour treaty obligations to allies like Australia.  And we will constantly strengthen ourcapabilities to meet the needs of the 21st century.  Our enduring interests in the regiondemand our enduring presence in the region.  The United States is a Pacific power, and we arehere to stay.
Indeed, we are already modernizing America’s defense posture across the Asia Pacific.  It willbe more broadly distributed -- maintaining our strong presence in Japan and the KoreanPeninsula, while enhancing our presence in Southeast Asia.  Our posture will be more flexible-- with new capabilities to ensure that our forces can operate freely.  And our posture will bemore sustainable, by helping allies and partners build their capacity, with more training andexercises.
We see our new posture here in Australia.  The initiatives that the Prime Minister and Iannounced yesterday will bring our two militaries even closer together.  We’ll have newopportunities to train with other allies and partners, from the Pacific to the Indian Ocean.  Andit will allow us to respond faster to the full range of challenges, including humanitarian crisesand disaster relief.
  
Since World War II, Australians have warmly welcomed American service members who'vepassed through.  On behalf of the American people, I thank you for welcoming those who willcome next, as they ensure that our alliance stays strong and ready for the tests of our time.
We see America’s enhanced presence in the alliance that we’ve strengthened:  In Japan,where our alliance remains a cornerstone of regional security.  In Thailand, where we’repartnering for disaster relief.  In the Philippines, where we’re increasing ship visits andtraining.  And in South Korea, where our commitment to the security of the Republic of Koreawill never waver.  Indeed, we also reiterate our resolve to act firmly against any proliferationactivities by North Korea.  The transfer of nuclear materials or material by North Korea tostates or non-state entities would be considered a grave threat to the United States and ourallies, and we would hold North Korea fully accountable for the consequences of such action.
We see America’s enhanced presence across Southeast Asia -- in our partnership withIndonesia against piracy and violent extremism, and in our work with Malaysia to preventproliferation; in the ships we’ll deploy to Singapore, and in our closer cooperation withVietnam and Cambodia; and in our welcome of India as it “looks east” and plays a larger roleas an Asian power.
At the same time, we’ll reengage with our regional organizations.  Our work in Bali this weekwill mark my third meeting with ASEAN leaders, and I’ll be proud to be the first AmericanPresident to attend the East Asia Summit.  And together, I believe we can address sharedchallenges, such as proliferation and maritime security, including cooperation in the SouthChina Sea.
Meanwhile, the United States will continue our effort to build a cooperative relationship withChina.  All of our nations -- Australia, the United States -- all of our nations have a profoundinterest in the rise of a peaceful and prosperous China. That's why the United Stateswelcomes it.  We’ve seen that China can be a partner from reducing tensions on the KoreanPeninsula to preventing proliferation.  And we’ll seek more opportunities for cooperation withBeijing, including greater communication between our militaries to promote understandingand avoid miscalculation.  We will do this, even as we continue to speak candidly to Beijingabout the importance of upholding international norms and respecting the universal humanrights of the Chinese people.
A secure and peaceful Asia is the foundation for the second area in which America is leadingagain, and that's advancing our shared prosperity.  History teaches us the greatest force theworld has ever known for creating wealth and opportunity is free markets.  So we seekeconomies that are open and transparent.  We seek trade that is free and fair.  And we seekan open international economic system, where rules are clear and every nation plays by them.
In Australia and America, we understand these principles.  We’re among the most openeconomies on Earth.
  
Six years into our landmark trade agreement, commerce between us has soared.  Ourworkers are creating new partnerships and new products, like the advanced aircrafttechnologies we build together in Victoria.  We’re the leading investor in Australia, and youinvest more in America than you do in any other nation, creating good jobs in both countries.
We recognize that economic partnerships can’t just be about one nation extracting another’sresources.  We understand that no long-term strategy for growth can be imposed fromabove.  Real prosperity -- prosperity that fosters innovation, and prosperity that endures --comes from unleashing our greatest economic resource, and that’s the entrepreneurial spirit,the talents of our people.
So even as America competes aggressively in Asian markets, we’re forging the economicpartnerships that create opportunity for all.  Building on our historic trade agreement withSouth Korea, we’re working with Australia and our other APEC partners to create a seamlessregional economy.  And with Australia and other partners, we’re on track to achieve our mostambitious trade agreement yet, and a potential model for the entire region -- the Trans-PacificPartnership.
The United States remains the world’s largest and most dynamic economy.  But in aninterconnected world, we all rise and fall together.  That’s why I pushed so hard to put theG20 at the front and center of global economic decision-making -- to give more nations aleadership role in managing the international economy, including Australia.  And together, wesaved the world economy from a depression.  And now, our urgent challenge is to create thegrowth that puts people to work.
We need growth that is fair, where every nation plays by the rules; where workers rights arerespected, and our businesses can compete on a level playing field; where the intellectualproperty and new technologies that fuel innovation are protected; and where currencies aremarket driven so no nation has an unfair advantage.
We also need growth that is broad -- not just for the few, but for the many -- with reformsthat protect consumers from abuse and a global commitment to end the corruption that stiflesgrowth.  We need growth that is balanced, because we will all prosper more when countrieswith large surpluses take action to boost demand at home.
And we need growth that is sustainable.  This includes the clean energy that creates greenjobs and combats climate change, which cannot be denied.  We see it in the stronger fires, thedevastating floods, the Pacific islands confronting rising seas. And as countries with largecarbon footprints, the United States and Australia have a special responsibility to lead.
  
Every nation will contribute to the solution in its own way -- and I know this issue is notwithout controversy, in both our countries.  But what we can do -- and what we are doing -- isto work together to make unprecedented investments in clean energy, to increase energyefficiency, and to meet the commitments we made at Copenhagen and Cancun.  We can dothis, and we will.
As we grow our economies, we’ll also remember the link between growth and goodgovernance -- the rule of law, transparent institutions, the equal administration of justice. Because history shows that, over the long run, democracy and economic growth go hand inhand.  And prosperity without freedom is just another form of poverty.
And this brings me to the final area where we are leading -- our support for the fundamentalrights of every human being.  Every nation will chart its own course.  Yet it is also true thatcertain rights are universal; among them, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedomof assembly, freedom of religion, and the freedom of citizens to choose their own leaders.
These are not American rights, or Australian rights, or Western rights.  These are humanrights.  They stir in every soul, as we’ve seen in the democracies that have succeeded here inAsia.  Other models have been tried and they have failed -- fascism and communism, rule byone man and rule by committee.  And they failed for the same simple reason:  They ignorethe ultimate source of power and legitimacy -- the will of the people.  Yes, democracy can bemessy and rough -- I understand you mix it up quite well during Question Time.  Butwhatever our differences of party or of ideology, we know in our democracies we are blessedwith the greatest form of government ever known to man.
So as two great democracies, we speak up for those freedoms when they are threatened.  Wepartner with emerging democracies, like Indonesia, to help strengthen the institutions uponwhich good governance depends.  We encourage open government, because democraciesdepend on an informed and active citizenry.  We help strengthen civil societies, because theyempower our citizens to hold their governments accountable.  And we advance the rights of allpeople -- women, minorities and indigenous cultures -- because when societies harness thepotential of all their citizens, these societies are more successful, they are more prosperousand they are more just.
These principles have guided our approach to Burma, with a combination of sanctions andengagement.  And today, Aung San Suu Kyi is free from house arrest.  Some politicalprisoners have been released, and the government has begun a dialogue.  Still, violations ofhuman rights persist.  So we will continue to speak clearly about the steps that must be takenfor the government of Burma to have a better relationship with the United States.
This is the future we seek in the Asia Pacific -- security, prosperity and dignity for all.  That’swhat we stand for.  That’s who we are.  That’s the future we will pursue, in partnership withallies and friends, and with every element of American power.  So let there be no doubt:  Inthe Asia Pacific in the 21st century, the United States of America is all in.
  
Still, in times of great change and uncertainty, the future can seem unsettling.  Across a vastocean, it’s impossible to know what lies beyond the horizon.  But if this vast region and itspeople teach us anything, it’s the yearning for liberty and progress will not be denied.
It’s why women in this country demanded that their voices be heard, making Australia thefirst nation to let women vote and run for parliament and, one day, become Prime Minister. It’s why the people took to the streets -- from Delhi to Seoul, from Manila to Jakarta -- tothrow off colonialism and dictatorship and build some of the world’s largest democracies.
It’s why a soldier in a watchtower along the DMZ defends a free people in the South, and whya man from the North risks his life to escape across the border.  Why soldiers in blue helmetskeep the peace in a new nation.  And why women of courage go into brothels to save younggirls from modern-day slavery, which must come to an end.
It’s why men of peace in saffron robes faced beatings and bullets, and why every day -- fromsome of the world’s largest cities to dusty rural towns, in small acts of courage the world maynever see -- a student posts a blog; a citizen signs a charter; an activist remains unbowed,imprisoned in his home, just to have the same rights that we cherish here today.
Men and women like these know what the world must never forget.  The currents of historymay ebb and flow, but over time they move -- decidedly, decisively -- in a single direction. History is on the side of the free -- free societies, free governments, free economies, freepeople.  And the future belongs to those who stand firm for those ideals, in this region andaround the world.
This is the story of the alliance we celebrate today.  This is the essence of America’sleadership; it is the essence of our partnership.  This is the work we will carry on together, forthe security and prosperity and dignity of all people. 
So God bless Australia.  God bless America.  And God bless the friendship between our twopeoples.
