Good evening, everybody. Tonight, after nearly 100 years of talk and frustration, afterdecades of trying, and a year of sustained effort and debate, the United States Congressfinally declared that America’s workers and America's families and America's small businessesdeserve the security of knowing that here, in this country, neither illness nor accident shouldendanger the dreams they’ve worked a lifetime to achieve.
Tonight, at a time when the pundits said it was no longer possible, we rose above the weightof our politics. We pushed back on the undue influence of special interests. We didn't give into mistrust or to cynicism or to fear. Instead, we proved that we are still a people capable ofdoing big things and tackling our biggest challenges. We proved that this government -- agovernment of the people and by the people -- still works for the people.
I want to thank every member of Congress who stood up tonight with courage and convictionto make health care reform a reality. And I know this wasn’t an easy vote for a lot of people.But it was the right vote. I want to thank Speaker Nancy Pelosi for her extraordinaryleadership, and Majority Leader Steny Hoyer and Majority Whip Jim Clyburn for theircommitment to getting the job done. I want to thank my outstanding Vice President, JoeBiden, and my wonderful Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius, fortheir fantastic work on this issue. I want to thank the many staffers in Congress, and my ownincredible staff in the White House, who have worked tirelessly over the past year withAmericans of all walks of life to forge a reform package finally worthy of the people we weresent here to serve.
  
Today’s vote answers the dreams of so many who have fought for this reform. To everyunsung American who took the time to sit down and write a letter or type out an e-mailhoping your voice would be heard -- it has been heard tonight. To the untold numbers whoknocked on doors and made phone calls, who organized and mobilized out of a firm convictionthat change in this country comes not from the top down, but from the bottom up -- let mereaffirm that conviction: This moment is possible because of you.
Most importantly, today’s vote answers the prayers of every American who has hoped deeplyfor something to be done about a health care system that works for insurance companies, butnot for ordinary people. For most Americans, this debate has never been about abstractions,the fight between right and left, Republican and Democrat -- it’s always been about somethingfar more personal. It’s about every American who knows the shock of opening an envelope tosee that their premiums just shot up again when times are already tough enough. It’s aboutevery parent who knows the desperation of trying to cover a child with a chronic illness onlyto be told “no” again and again and again. It’s about every small business owner forced tochoose between insuring employees and staying open for business. They are why wecommitted ourselves to this cause.
Tonight’s vote is not a victory for any one party -- it's a victory for them. It's a victory for theAmerican people. And it's a victory for common sense.
Now, it probably goes without saying that tonight’s vote will give rise to a frenzy of instantanalysis. There will be tallies of Washington winners and losers, predictions about what itmeans for Democrats and Republicans, for my poll numbers, for my administration. But longafter the debate fades away and the prognostication fades away and the dust settles, whatwill remain standing is not the government-run system some feared, or the status quo thatserves the interests of the insurance industry, but a health care system that incorporatesideas from both parties -- a system that works better for the American people.
If you have health insurance, this reform just gave you more control by reining in the worstexcesses and abuses of the insurance industry with some of the toughest consumerprotections this country has ever known -- so that you are actually getting what you pay for.
If you don’t have insurance, this reform gives you a chance to be a part of a big purchasingpool that will give you choice and competition and cheaper prices for insurance. And itincludes the largest health care tax cut for working families and small businesses in history --so that if you lose your job and you change jobs, start that new business, you’ll finally be ableto purchase quality, affordable care and the security and peace of mind that comes with it.
This reform is the right thing to do for our seniors. It makes Medicare stronger and moresolvent, extending its life by almost a decade. And it’s the right thing to do for our future. Itwill reduce our deficit by more than $100 billion over the next decade, and more than $1trillion in the decade after that.
  
So this isn’t radical reform. But it is major reform. This legislation will not fix everything thatails our health care system. But it moves us decisively in the right direction. This is whatchange looks like.
Now as momentous as this day is, it's not the end of this journey. On Tuesday, the Senate willtake up revisions to this legislation that the House has embraced, and these are revisions thathave strengthened this law and removed provisions that had no place in it. Some havepredicted another siege of parliamentary maneuvering in order to delay adoption of theseimprovements. I hope that’s not the case. It’s time to bring this debate to a close and beginthe hard work of implementing this reform properly on behalf of the American people. Thisyear, and in years to come, we have a solemn responsibility to do it right.
Nor does this day represent the end of the work that faces our country. The work ofrevitalizing our economy goes on. The work of promoting private sector job creation goes on.The work of putting American families’ dreams back within reach goes on. And we march on,with renewed confidence, energized by this victory on their behalf.
In the end, what this day represents is another stone firmly laid in the foundation of theAmerican Dream. Tonight, we answered the call of history as so many generations ofAmericans have before us. When faced with crisis, we did not shrink from our challenge -- weovercame it. We did not avoid our responsibility -- we embraced it. We did not fear our future-- we shaped it.
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.
