Thank you very much, Mr. President.
You know, four years ago, following the most devastating attack in our history, this Bodypassed the USA PATRIOT Act in order to give our Nation's law enforcement the tools theyneeded to track down terrorists who plot and lurk within our own borders and all over theworld; terrorists who, right now, are looking to exploit weaknesses in our laws and oursecurity to carry out attacks that may be even deadlier than those that took place onSeptember 11th.
We all agree that we need legislation to make it harder for suspected terrorists to goundetected in this country. And we all agree that we needed to make it harder for them toorganize and strategize and get flight licenses and sneak across our borders. Americanseverywhere wanted to do that.
But soon after the PATRIOT Act passed, a few years before I even arrived here in the Senate,I began hearing concerns from people of every background and political leaning that this law,the very purpose of which was to protect us, was also threatening to violate some of therights and freedoms that we hold most dear; that it didn't just provide law enforcement thepowers it needed to keep us safe but powers that it didn't need to invade our privacy withoutcause or suspicion.

Now, in Washington, this issue has tended to degenerate into the typical either/or debate:Either we protect our people from terror or we protect our most cherished principles. I wouldsuggest, Mr. President, that this is a false choice. It asks too little of us and it assumes toolittle about America.
That's why, as it's come to time to reauthorize the USA PATRIOT Act, we've been working in abipartisan way to do both -- to show American people that we can track down terroristswithout trampling on our civil liberties, to show the American people that the FederalGovernment will only issue warrants and execute searches because it needs to do so, notbecause it can do so.
What we have been trying to achieve under the leadership of a bipartisan group of Senators issome accountability in this process to get answers and see evidence where there is suspicion.
Several weeks ago, these efforts bore fruit. The Judiciary Committee and the U.S. -- U.S.Senate managed to pass a piece of bipartisan legislation that, while I can't say is perfect, wasable to address some of the most serious problems in the existing law.
Unfortunately, that strong bipartisan legislation has been tossed aside in conference. Instead,we've been forced to consider a piece of rushed legislation that fails to address the concernsof Members of both parties as well as the American people.
This is legislation that puts our own Justice Department above the law. When national securityletters are issued, they allow Federal agents to conduct any search on any American, nomatter how extensive, how wide ranging, without ever going before a judge to prove that thesearch is necessary. All that is needed is a signoff from a local FBI agent. That's it.
Once a business or a person receives notification that they will be searched, they areprohibited from telling anyone about it and they're even prohibited from challenging thisautomatic gag order in court. Even though judges have already found that similar restrictionsviolate the first amendment, this conference report disregards the case law and the right tochallenge the gag order.
If you do decide to consult an attorney for legal advice, hold on. You will have to tell the FBIthat you've done so. Think about that: You want to talk to a lawyer about whether or not youractions are going to be causing you to get into trouble, you've got to tell the FBI that you'reconsulting a lawyer. This is unheard of. There is no such requirement in any other area of thelaw. I see no reason why it's justified here.
And if someone wants to know why their own Government has decided to go on a fishingexpedition through every personal record or private document, through the library books thatyou read, the phone calls that you've made, the e-mails that you've sent, this legislation givespeople no rights to appeal the need for such a search in a court of law.

No judge will hear your plea; no jury will hear your case. This is just plain wrong. And thereare Republican Senators as well as Democratic Senators that recognize that it's plain wrong.
Giving law enforcement the tools they need to investigate suspicious activities is one thingand it's the right thing; but doing it without any real oversight seriously jeopardizes the rightsof all Americans and the ideals America stands for.
Now, supporters of this conference report have argued we should just hold our noses andsupport this legislation because it's not going to get any better. That is not a good argument.We can do better. We've got time to do better. It doesn't convince me that I should supportthis report. I believe we owe it to the Nation, we owe it to those who fought for our civilliberties, we owe it to the future and our children to make sure that we craft the kind oflegislation that would make us proud, not just legislation that we would settle for becausewe're in a rush. We don't have to settle for a PATRIOT Act that sacrifices our liberties or oursafety. We can have one that secures both.
Now, there have been proposals on both sides of the aisle and in both Houses of Congress toextend the PATRIOT Act for three months so that we can reach an agreement on this bill thatis well thought through. I support these efforts and will oppose cloture on what I consider tobe this unacceptable conference report.
Mr. President, I thank you. I yield the floor....