To the United States Corps of Cadets, to the men and women of our armed services, and tomy fellow Americans: I want to speak to you tonight about our effort in Afghanistan -- thenature of our commitment there, the scope of our interests, and the strategy that myAdministration will pursue to bring this war to a successful conclusion. It's an extraordinaryhonor for me to do so here at West Point, where so many men and women have prepared tostand up for our security, and to represent what is finest about our country. 
To address these important issues, it's important to recall why America and our allies werecompelled to fight a war in Afghanistan in the first place. We did not ask for this fight. OnSeptember 11th, 2001, 19 men hijacked four airplanes and used them to murder nearly 3,000people. They struck at our military and economic nerve centers. They took the lives ofinnocent men, women, and children without regard to their faith or race or station. Were it notfor the heroic actions of passengers on board one of these flights, they could have also struckat one of the great symbols of our democracy in Washington, and killed many more.
As we know, these men belonged to al Qaeda -- a group of extremists who have distorted anddefiled Islam, one of the world's great religions, to justify the slaughter of innocents. AlQaeda's base of operations was in Afghanistan, where they were harbored by the Taliban -- aruthless, repressive, and radical movement that seized control of that country after it wasravaged by years of Soviet occupation and civil war, and after the attention of America andour friends had turned elsewhere.

Just days after 9/11, Congress authorized the use of force against al Qaeda and those whoharbored them -- an authorization that continues to this day. The vote in the Senate was 98to 0. The vote in the House was 420 to 1. For the first time in its history, the North AtlanticTreaty Organization invoked Article 5 -- the commitment that says an attack on one membernation is an attack on all. And the United Nations Security Council endorsed the use of allnecessary steps to respond to the 9/11 attacks. America, our allies, and the world were actingas one to destroy al Qaeda's terrorist network, and to protect our common security.
Under the banner of this domestic unity and international legitimacy -- and only after theTaliban refused to turn over Osama bin Laden -- we sent our troops into Afghanistan. Within amatter of months, al Qaeda was scattered and many of its operatives were killed. The Talibanwas driven from power and pushed back on its heels. A place that had known decades of fearnow had reason to hope. At a conference convened by the UN, a provisional government wasestablished under President Hamid Karzai. And an International Security Assistance Force wasestablished to help bring a lasting peace to a war-torn country.
Then, in early 2003, the decision was made to wage a second war in Iraq. The wrenchingdebate over the Iraq War is well-known and need not be repeated here. It's enough to saythat for the next six years, the Iraq War drew the dominant share of our troops, ourresources, our diplomacy, and our national attention -- and that the decision to go into Iraqcaused substantial rifts between America and much of the world.
Today, after extraordinary costs, we are bringing the Iraq war to an responsible end. We willremove our combat brigades from Iraq by the end of next summer, and all of our troops bythe end of 2011. That we are doing so is a testament to the character of the men and womenin uniform. Thanks to their courage, grit, and perseverance, we have given Iraqis a chance toshape their future, and we are successfully leaving Iraq to its people.
But while we have achieved hard-earned milestones in Iraq, the situation in Afghanistan hasdeteriorated. After escaping across the border into Pakistan in 2001 and 2002, al Qaeda'sleadership established a safe-haven there. Although a legitimate government was elected bythe Afghan people, it's been hampered by corruption, the drug trade, an under-developedeconomy, and insufficient security forces. Over the last several years, the Taliban hasmaintained common cause with al Qaeda, as they both seek an overthrow of the Afghangovernment. Gradually, the Taliban has begun to control additional swaths of territory inAfghanistan, while engaging in increasingly brazen and devastating attacks of terrorismagainst the Pakistani people.
Now throughout this period, our troop levels in Afghanistan remained a fraction of what theywere in Iraq. When I took office, we had just over 32,000 Americans serving in Afghanistan,compared to 160,000 in Iraq at the peak of the war. Commanders in Afghanistan repeatedlyasked for support to deal with the reemergence of the Taliban, but these reinforcements didnot arrive.

And that's why, shortly after taking office, I approved a long-standing request for moretroops. After consultations with our allies, I then announced a strategy recognizing thefundamental connection between our war effort in Afghanistan and the extremist safe-havensin Pakistan. I set a goal that was narrowly defined as disrupting, dismantling, and defeating alQaeda and its extremist allies, and pledged to better coordinate our military and civilian effort.
Since then, we have made progress on some important objectives. High-ranking al Qaeda andTaliban leaders have been killed, and we've stepped up the pressure on al Qaeda world-wide.In Pakistan, that nation's Army has gone on its largest offensive in years. In Afghanistan, weand our allies prevented the Taliban from stopping a presidential election, and although it wasmarred by fraud, that election produced a government that is consistent with Afghanistan'slaws and Constitution.
Yet huge challenges remain. Afghanistan is not lost, but for several years it has movedbackwards. There's no imminent threat of the government being overthrown, but the Talibanhas gained momentum. Al Qaeda has not reemerged in Afghanistan in the same numbers asbefore 9/11, but they retain their safe-havens along the border. And our forces lack the fullsupport they need to effectively train and partner with Afghan security forces and bettersecure the population. Our new Commander in Afghanistan, General McChrystal, has reportedthat the security situation is more serious than he anticipated. In short, the status quo is notsustainable.
As cadets, you volunteered for service during this time of danger. Some of you fought inAfghanistan. Some of you will deploy there. As your Commander-in-Chief, I owe you a missionthat is clearly defined and worthy of your service. And that's why, after the Afghan voting wascompleted, I insisted on a thorough review of our strategy. Now let me be clear: There hasnever been an option before me that called for troop deployments before 2010. So there hasbeen no delay or denial of resources necessary for the conduct of the war during this reviewperiod. Instead, the review has allowed me ask the hard questions, and to explore all of thedifferent options along with my national security team, our military and civilian leadership inAfghanistan, and our key partners. Now given the stakes involved, I owed the Americanpeople, and our troops, no less.
This review is now complete. And as Commander-in-Chief, I have determined that it is in ourvital national interest to send an additional 30,000 U.S. troops to Afghanistan. After 18months, our troops will begin to come home. These are the resources that we need to seizethe initiative, while building the Afghan capacity that can allow for a responsible transition ofour forces out of Afghanistan.
I do not make this decision lightly. I opposed the war in Iraq precisely because I believe thatwe must exercise restraint in the use of military force, and always consider the long-termconsequences of our actions. We have been at war now for eight years, at enormous cost inlives and resources. Years of debate over Iraq and terrorism have left our unity on nationalsecurity issues in tatters and created a highly polarized and partisan backdrop for this effort.

And having just experienced the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, theAmerican people are understandably focused on rebuilding our economy and putting people towork here at home.
And most of all, I know that this decision asks even more of you -- a military that, along withyour families, has already borne the heaviest of all burdens. As President, I have signed aletter of condolence to the family of each American who gives their life in these wars. I haveread the letters from the parents and spouses of those who deployed. I've visited ourcourageous wounded warriors at Walter Reed. I've travelled to Dover to meet the flag-drapedcaskets of 18 Americans returning home to their final resting place. I see firsthand the terriblewages of war. If I did not think that the security of the United States and the safety of theAmerican people were at stake in Afghanistan, I would gladly order every single one of ourtroops home tomorrow.
So no, I do not make this decision lightly. I make this decision because I am convinced thatour security is at stake in Afghanistan and Pakistan. This is the epicenter of violent extremismpracticed by al Qaeda. It is from here that we were attacked on 9/11, and it is from here thatnew attacks are being plotted as I speak. This is no idle danger, no hypothetical threat. In thelast few months alone, we have apprehended extremists within our borders who were senthere from the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan to commit new acts of terror. Andthis danger will only grow if the region slides backwards, and al Qaeda can operate withimpunity. We must keep the pressure on al Qaeda, and to do that we must increase thestability and capacity of our partners in the region.
Of course this burden is not ours alone to bear. This is not just America's war. Since 9/11, alQaeda's safe-havens have been the source of attacks against London and Amman and Bali.The people and governments of both Afghanistan and Pakistan are endangered. And thestakes are even higher within a nuclear-armed Pakistan, because we know that al Qaeda andother extremists seek nuclear weapons, and we have every reason to believe that they woulduse them.
These facts compel us to act along with our friends and allies. Our overarching goal remainsthe same: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al Qaeda in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and toprevent its capacity to threaten America and our allies in the future.
To meet that goal, we will pursue the following objectives within Afghanistan. We must denyal Qaeda a safe-haven. We must reverse the Taliban's momentum and deny it the ability tooverthrow the government. And we must strengthen the capacity of Afghanistan's securityforces and government, so that they can take lead responsibility for Afghanistan's future.

We will meet these objectives in three ways. First, we will pursue a military strategy that willbreak the Taliban's momentum and increase Afghanistan's capacity over the next 18 months.
The 30,000 additional troops that I'm announcing tonight will deploy in the first part of 2010 -
- the fastest possible pace -- so that they can target the insurgency and secure key populationcenters. They'll increase our ability to train competent Afghan security forces, and to partnerwith them so that more Afghans can get into the fight. And they will help create the conditionsfor the United States to transfer responsibility to the Afghans.
Because this is an international effort, I've asked that our commitment be joined bycontributions from our allies. Some have already provided additional troops, and we'reconfident that there will be further contributions in the days and weeks ahead. Our friendshave fought and bled and died alongside us in Afghanistan. And now we must come togetherto end this war successfully. For what's at stake is not simply a test of NATO's credibility;what's at stake is the security of our allies, and the common security of the world.
Now taken together, these additional American and international troops will allow us toaccelerate handing over responsibility to Afghan forces, and allow us to begin the transfer ofour forces out of Afghanistan in July of 2011. Just as we have done in Iraq, we will executethis transition responsibly, taking into account conditions on the ground. We'll continue toadvise and assist Afghanistan's security forces to ensure that they can succeed over the longhaul. But it will be clear to the Afghan government -- and more importantly, to the Afghanpeople -- that they will ultimately be responsible for their own country.
Second, we will work with our partners, the United Nations, and the Afghan people to pursuea more effective civilian strategy, so that the government can take advantage of improvedsecurity.
This effort must be based on performance. The days of providing a blank check are over.President Karzai's inauguration speech sent the right message about moving in a newdirection. And going forward, we will be clear about what we expect from those who receiveour assistance. We'll support Afghan Ministries, governors, and local leaders that combatcorruption and deliver for the people. We expect those who are ineffective or corrupt to beheld accountable. And we will also focus our assistance in areas, such as agriculture, that canmake an immediate impact in the lives of the Afghan people.
The people of Afghanistan have endured violence for decades. They've been confronted withoccupation by the Soviet Union, and then by foreign al Qaeda fighters who used Afghan landfor their own purposes. So tonight, I want the Afghan people to understand: America seeks anend to this era of war and suffering. We have no interest in occupying your country. We willsupport efforts by the Afghan government to open the door to those Taliban who abandonviolence and respect the human rights of their fellow citizens.

And we will seek a partnership with Afghanistan grounded in mutual respect -- to isolate thosewho destroy, to strengthen those who build, to hasten the day when our troops will leave, andto forge a lasting friendship in which America is your partner, and never your patron.
Third, we will act with the full recognition that our success in Afghanistan is inextricably linkedto our partnership with Pakistan.
We're in Afghanistan to prevent a cancer from once again spreading through that country. Butthis same cancer has also taken root in the border region of Pakistan. And that's why we needa strategy that works on both sides of the border.
In the past, there have been those in Pakistan who have argued that the struggle againstextremism is not their fight, and that Pakistan is better off doing little or seekingaccommodation with those who use violence. But in recent years, as innocents have beenkilled from Karachi to Islamabad, it has become clear that it is the Pakistani people who arethe most endangered by extremism. Public opinion has turned. The Pakistani Army has wagedan offensive in Swat and South Waziristan. And there is no doubt that the United States andPakistan share a common enemy.
In the past, we too often defined our relationship with Pakistan narrowly. And those days areover. Moving forward, we are committed to a partnership with Pakistan that is built on afoundation of mutual interests, mutual respect, and mutual trust. We will strengthenPakistan's capacity to target those groups that threaten our countries, and have made it clearthat we cannot tolerate a safe-haven for terrorists whose location is known, and whoseintentions are clear. America is also providing substantial resources to support Pakistan'sdemocracy and development. We are the largest international supporter for those Pakistanisdisplaced by the fighting. And going forward, the Pakistani people must know: America willremain a strong supporter of Pakistan's security and prosperity long after the guns have fallensilent, so that the great potential of its people can be unleashed.
These are the three core elements of our strategy: a military effort to create the conditions fora transition; a civilian surge that reinforces positive action; and an effective partnership withPakistan.
I recognize that there are a range of concerns about our approach. So let me briefly address afew of the prominent arguments that I have heard, and which I take very seriously.
First, there are those who suggest that Afghanistan is another Vietnam. They argue that itcannot be stabilized, and we're better off cutting our losses and rapidly withdrawing. I believethis argument depends upon a false reading of history. Unlike Vietnam, we are joined by abroad coalition of 43 nations that recognizes the legitimacy of our action. Unlike Vietnam, weare not facing a broad-based popular insurgency.

And most importantly, unlike Vietnam, the American people were viciously attacked fromAfghanistan, and remain a target for those same extremists who are plotting along its border.To abandon this area now, and to rely only on efforts against al Qaeda from a distance, wouldsignificantly hamper our ability to keep the pressure on al Qaeda, and create an unacceptablerisk of additional attacks on our homeland and our allies.
Second, there are those who acknowledge that we can't leave Afghanistan in its current state,but suggest that we go forward with the troops that we already have. But this would simplymaintain a status quo in which we muddle through, and permit a slow deterioration ofconditions there. It would ultimately prove more costly and prolong our stay in Afghanistan,because we would never be able to generate the conditions needed to train Afghan securityforces and give them the space to take over.
Finally, there are those who oppose identifying a timeframe for our transition to Afghanresponsibility. Indeed, some call for a more dramatic and open-ended escalation of our wareffort -- one that would commit us to a nation building project of up to a decade. I reject thiscourse because it sets goals that are beyond what can be achieved at a reasonable cost, andwhat we need to achieve to secure our interests. Furthermore, the absence of a timeframe fortransition would deny us any sense of urgency in working with the Afghan government. Itmust be clear that Afghans will have to take responsibility for their security, and that Americahas no interest in fighting an endless war in Afghanistan.
As President, I refuse to set goals that go beyond our responsibility, our means, or ourinterests. And I must weigh all of the challenges that our nation faces. I don't have the luxuryof committing to just one. Indeed, I'm mindful of the words of President Eisenhower, who -- indiscussing our national security -- said, "Each proposal must be weighed in the light of abroader consideration: the need to maintain balance in and among national programs."
Over the past several years, we have lost that balance. We've failed to appreciate theconnection between our national security and our economy. In the wake of an economic crisis,too many of our neighbors and friends are out of work and struggle to pay the bills. Too manyAmericans are worried about the future facing our children. Meanwhile, competition within theglobal economy has grown more fierce. So we can't simply afford to ignore the price of thesewars.
All told, by the time I took office the cost of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan approached atrillion dollars. Going forward, I am committed to addressing these costs openly and honestly.Our new approach in Afghanistan is likely to cost us roughly 30 billion dollars for the militarythis year, and I'll work closely with Congress to address these costs as we work to bring downour deficit.

But as we end the war in Iraq and transition to Afghan responsibility, we must rebuild ourstrength here at home. Our prosperity provides a foundation for our power. It pays for ourmilitary. It underwrites our diplomacy. It taps the potential of our people, and allowsinvestment in new industry. And it will allow us to compete in this century as successfully aswe did in the last. That's why our troop commitment in Afghanistan cannot be open-ended --because the nation that I am most interested in building is our own.
Now let me be clear: None of this will be easy. The struggle against violent extremism will notbe finished quickly, and it extends well beyond Afghanistan and Pakistan. It will be anenduring test of our free society and our leadership in the world. And unlike the great powerconflicts and clear lines of division that defined the 20th century, our effort will involvedisorderly regions, failed states, diffuse enemies.
So as a result, America will have to show our strength in the way that we end wars andprevent conflict -- not just how we wage wars. We'll have to be nimble and precise in our useof military power. Where al Qaeda and its allies attempt to establish a foothold -- whether inSomalia or Yemen or elsewhere -- they must be confronted by growing pressure and strongpartnerships.
And we can't count on military might alone. We have to invest in our homeland security,because we can't capture or kill every violent extremist abroad. We have to improve andbetter coordinate our intelligence, so that we stay one step ahead of shadowy networks.
We will have to take away the tools of mass destruction. And that's why I've made it a centralpillar of my foreign policy to secure loose nuclear materials from terrorists, to stop the spreadof nuclear weapons, and to pursue the goal of a world without them, because every nationmust understand that true security will never come from an endless race for ever-moredestructive weapons. True security will come for those who reject them.
We will have to use diplomacy, because no one nation can meet the challenges of aninterconnected world acting alone. I've spent this year renewing our alliances and forging newpartnerships. And we have forged a new beginning between America and the Muslim World --one that recognizes our mutual interest in breaking a cycle of conflict, and that promises afuture in which those who kill innocents are isolated by those who stand up for peace andprosperity and human dignity.
And finally, we must draw on the strength of our values. For the challenges that we face mayhave changed, but the things that we believe in must not. And that's why we must promoteour values by living them at home -- which is why I have prohibited torture and will close theprison at Guantanamo Bay. And we must make it clear to every man, woman, and childaround the world who lives under the dark cloud of tyranny that America will speak out onbehalf of their human rights, and tend to the light of freedom, and justice, and opportunity,and respect for the dignity of all peoples. That is who we are. That is the source, the moralsource of America's authority.

Since the days of Franklin Roosevelt, and the service and sacrifice of our grandparents andgreat grandparents, our country has borne a special burden in global affairs. We have spilledAmerican blood in many countries on multiple continents. We have spent our revenue to helpothers rebuild from rubble and develop their own economies. We have joined with others todevelop an architecture of institutions from the United Nations to NATO to the World Bank thatprovide for the common security and prosperity of human beings.
We have not always been thanked for these efforts, and we have at times made mistakes. Butmore than any other nation, the United States of America has underwritten global security forover six decades -- a time that, for all its problems, has seen walls come down, and marketsopen, and billions lifted from poverty, unparalleled scientific progress, and advancing frontiersof human liberty. 
For unlike the great powers of old, we have not sought world domination. Our union wasfounded in resistance to oppression. We do not seek to occupy other nations. We will notclaim another nation's resources or target other peoples because their faith or ethnicity isdifferent from ours. What we have fought for, and what we continue to fight for, is a betterfuture for our children and grandchildren, and we believe that their lives will be better ifothers [sic] peoples' children and grandchildren can live in freedom and access opportunity.
As a country, we're not as young and perhaps not as innocent as we were when Rooseveltwas President. Yet we are still heirs to a noble struggle for freedom. And now we mustsummon all of our might and moral suasion to meet the challenges of a new age.
In the end, our security and leadership does not come solely from the strength of our arms. Itderives from our people: from the workers and businesses who will rebuild our economy; fromthe entrepreneurs and researchers who will pioneer new industries; from the teachers that willeducate our children, and the service of those who work in our communities at home; fromthe diplomats and Peace Corps volunteers who spread hope abroad; and from the men andwomen in uniform who are part of an unbroken line of sacrifice that has made government ofthe people, by the people, and for the people a reality on this Earth.2
This vast and diverse citizenry will not always agree on every issue -- nor should we. But Ialso know that we, as a country, cannot sustain our leadership nor navigate the momentouschallenges of our time if we allow ourselves to be split asunder by the same rancor andcynicism and partisanship that has in recent times poisoned our national discourse.
It's easy to forget that when this war began, we were united -- bound together by the freshmemory of a horrific attack, and by the determination to defend our homeland and the valueswe hold dear. I refuse to accept the notion that we cannot summon that unity again. I believe-- I believe with every fiber of my being that we, as Americans, can still come together behinda common purpose. For our values are not simply words written into parchment. They are acreed that calls us together, and that has carried us through the darkest of storms as onenation, as one people.

America, we are passing through a time of great trial. And the message that we send in themidst of these storms must be clear: that our cause is just, our resolve unwavering. We willgo forward with the confidence that right makes might, and with the commitment to forge anAmerica that is safer, a world that is more secure, and a future that represents not thedeepest of fears but the highest of hopes.
Thank you. God Bless you. And God Bless the United States of America.