Thank you. Everybody, please have a seat, have a seat.
Well, good morning, everyone.
We are gathered in the heart of our nation’s capital, surrounded by memorials to leaders andcitizens who served our nation in its earliest days and in its days of greatest trial.  Today issuch a time for America. 
Over the past two years, we have faced the worst recession since the Great Depression.  Eightmillion people lost their jobs.  Tens of millions saw the value of their homes and retirementsavings plummet.  Countless businesses have been unable to get the loans they need andmany have been forced to shut their doors.  And although the economy is growing again, toomany people are still feeling the pain of the downturn.
Now, while a number of factors led to such a severe recession, the primary cause was abreakdown in our financial system.  It was a crisis born of a failure of responsibility fromcertain corners of Wall Street to the halls of power in Washington.  For years, our financialsector was governed by antiquated and poorly enforced rules that allowed some to game thesystem and take risks that endangered the entire economy. 
  
Unscrupulous lenders locked consumers into complex loans with hidden costs.  Firms like AIGplaced massive, risky bets with borrowed money.  And while the rules left abuse and excessunchecked, they also left taxpayers on the hook if a big bank or financial institution everfailed. 
Now, even before the crisis hit, I went to Wall Street and I called for common-sense reformsto protect consumers and our economy as a whole.  And soon after taking office, I proposed aset of reforms to empower consumers and investors, to bring the shadowy deals that causedthis crisis into the light of day, and to put a stop to taxpayer bailouts once and for all.  Today,thanks to a lot of people in this room, those reforms will become the law of the land. 
For the last year, Chairmen Barney Frank and Chris Dodd have worked day and night. Barneyand Chris have worked day and night to bring about this reform.  And I am profoundlygrateful to them.  I would be remiss if I didn't also express my appreciation to Senator HarryReid and Speaker Nancy Pelosi for their leadership.  It wouldn’t have happened without them.
Passing this bill was no easy task.  To get there, we had to overcome the furious lobbying ofan array of powerful interest groups and a partisan minority determined to block change.  Sothe members who are here today, both on the stage and in the audience, they have done agreat service in devoting so much time and expertise to this effort, to looking out for thepublic interests and not the special interests.  And I also want to thank the three Republicansenators who put partisanship aside, judged this bill on the merits, and voted for reform.  We’re grateful to them.  And the Republican House members.  Good to see you, Joe.
Now, let’s put this in perspective.  The fact is, the financial industry is central to our nation’sability to grow, to prosper, to compete and to innovate.  There are a lot of banks thatunderstand and fulfill this vital role, and there are a whole lot of bankers who want to do right-- and do right -- by their customers.  This reform will help foster innovation, not hamper it. It is designed to make sure that everybody follows the same set of rules, so that firmscompete on price and quality, not on tricks and not on traps.
It demands accountability and responsibility from everyone. It provides certainty toeverybody, from bankers to farmers to business owners to consumers.  And unless yourbusiness model depends on cutting corners or bilking your customers, you’ve got nothing tofear from reform.
Now, for all those Americans who are wondering what Wall Street reform means for you,here’s what you can expect.  If you’ve ever applied for a credit card, a student loan, or amortgage, you know the feeling of signing your name to pages of barely understandable fineprint.  What often happens as a result is that many Americans are caught by hidden fees andpenalties, or saddled with loans they can’t afford. 
  
That’s what happened to Robin Fox, hit with a massive rate increase on her credit cardbalance even though she paid her bills on time.  That’s what happened to Andrew Giordano,who discovered hundreds of dollars in overdraft fees on his bank statement -- fees he had noidea he might face.  Both are here today.  Well, with this law, unfair rate hikes, like the onethat hit Robin, will end for good.  And we’ll ensure that people like Andrew aren’t unwittinglycaught by overdraft fees when they sign up for a checking account.
With this law, we’ll crack down on abusive practices in the mortgage industry.  We’ll makesure that contracts are simpler -- putting an end to many hidden penalties and fees incomplex mortgages -- so folks know what they’re signing. 
With this law, students who take out college loans will be provided clear and conciseinformation about their obligations. 
And with this law, ordinary investors -- like seniors and folks saving for retirement -- will beable to receive more information about the costs and risks of mutual funds and otherinvestment products, so that they can make better financial decisions as to what will work forthem. 
So, all told, these reforms represent the strongest consumer financial protections in history. In history.  And these protections will be enforced by a new consumer watchdog with just onejob:  looking out for people -- not big banks, not lenders, not investment houses -- lookingout for people as they interact with the financial system.
And that’s not just good for consumers; that’s good for the economy.  Because reform will puta stop to a lot of the bad loans that fueled a debt-based bubble.  And it will mean allcompanies will have to seek customers by offering better products, instead of more deceptiveones.
Now, beyond the consumer protections I’ve outlined, reform will also rein in the abuse andexcess that nearly brought down our financial system.  It will finally bring transparency to thekinds of complex and risky transactions that helped trigger the financial crisis.  Shareholderswill also have a greater say on the pay of CEOs and other executives, so they can rewardsuccess instead of failure.
And finally, because of this law, the American people will never again be asked to foot the billfor Wall Street’s mistakes.  There will be no more tax-funded bailouts -- period.  If a largefinancial institution should ever fail, this reform gives us the ability to wind it down withoutendangering the broader economy.  And there will be new rules to make clear that no firm issomehow protected because it is “too big to fail,” so we don’t have another AIG. 
  
That's what this reform will mean.  Now, it doesn’t mean our work is over.  For these newrules to be effective, regulators will have to be vigilant.  We may need to make adjustmentsalong the way as our financial system adapts to these new changes and changes around theglobe.  No law can force anybody to be responsible; it’s still incumbent on those on WallStreet to heed the lessons of this crisis in terms of how they conduct their businesses.
The fact is every American -- from Main Street to Wall Street -- has a stake in our financialsystem.  Wall Street banks and firms invest the capital that makes it possible for start-ups tosell new products.  They provide loans to businesses to expand and to hire.  They backmortgages for families purchasing a new home.  That’s why we’ll all stand to gain from thesereforms.  We all win when investors around the world have confidence in our markets.  We allwin when shareholders have more power and more information.  We all win when consumersare protected against abuse.  And we all win when folks are rewarded based on how well theyperform, not how well they evade accountability.
In the end, our financial system only works -- our market is only free -- when there are clearrules and basic safeguards that prevent abuse, that check excess, that ensure that it is moreprofitable to play by the rules than to game the system.  And that’s what these reforms aredesigned to achieve -- no more, no less.  Because that’s how we will ensure that our economyworks for consumers, that it works for investors, that it works for financial institutions -- thatit works for all of us.
This is the central lesson not only of this crisis but of our history.  Ultimately, there’s nodividing line between Main Street and Wall Street.  We rise or fall together as one nation. Sothese reforms will help lift our economy and lead all of us to a stronger, more prosperousfuture.
And that’s why I’m so honored to sign these reforms into law, and I’m so grateful toeverybody who worked so hard to make this day possible.  
Thank you very much, everybody.
