Thank you, Miami Dade! Thank you. Please, everyone, be seated.
Hafeeza, thank you for that wonderful introduction. To Dr. Padrón, Dr. Vicente, to the board oftrustees, the faculty, parents, family, friends, and, most important, the class of 2011,congratulations -- congratulations on reaching this day.
And thank you for allowing me the profound honor of being a part of it. And thank you for myfirst honorary associate degree. One of the perks of this job is that degrees come free thesedays. Not that it impresses anybody at home. Now Michelle just says, “Hey, Doctor, go takethat dog for a walk.” 
It is such a thrill to be at one of the largest, most diverse institutions of higher learning inAmerica -- one that just this week was named one of the top community colleges in thenation. More than 170,000 students study across your eight campuses. You come from 181countries, represented by the flags that just marched across this stage. You speak 94languages. About 90 percent of you are minorities. And because more than 90 percent of youfind a job in your field of study, it’s fitting that your motto is “Opportunity changeseverything.”
As someone who’s only here because of the chances my education gave me, I couldn’t agreemore.
  
Opportunity changes everything. America will only be as strong in this new century as theopportunities that we provide you -- the opportunities that we provide to all our young people-- Latino, black, white, Asian, Native American, everybody. America will only be as strong asour pursuit of scientific research and our leadership in technology and innovation. And Ibelieve that community colleges like this one are critical pathways to the middle class thatequip students with the skills and the education necessary to compete and win in this 21st-
century economy.
And that’s why I’ve made community colleges a centerpiece of my education agenda, alongwith helping more students afford college. I couldn’t be prouder of the work we’ve done incommunity colleges. And your accomplishment today is vital to America reclaiming the highestproportion of college graduates in the world by 2020. So I am proud of you. I am proud ofyou.
I know that for many of you reaching this day wasn’t easy.
AUDIENCE: No.
THE PRESIDENT: See? I got some amens there.
Perhaps you’re the first in your family to go to college. Some of you have had to overcome bigobstacles, defeat your own doubts, prove yourself to everyone who ever believed that youcouldn’t make it because of what you look like or where you came from. And, of course -- ofcourse, for so many of you, this day represents the fulfillment of your family’s dreams whenyou were born. This is their achievement as well, so give it up for your parents and yourgrandparents, your cousins and your uncles and your aunties. This is their day, too. This istheir day, too.
See, the diploma you’re about to receive stands for something more than the investment youmade in yourselves. It’s the result of an investment made by generations before you; aninvestment in that radical yet simple idea that America is a place -- the place -- where youcan make it if you try. That’s the ideal that has made this country -- that’s the idea that’srepresented by that one flag that all of you cheered for; that’s what has made us a shininglight to the world.
And preserving this idea -- keeping the American Dream alive from one generation to the next-- that’s never been an easy task. It’s an even greater test in times of rapid change. And all ofyou are graduating at a moment when change is coming faster than ever before. We’reemerging from an economic downturn like we haven’t seen since the 1930s. Massive shifts intechnology have shifted profoundly what our economy looks like. Massive shifts abroadgeopolitically have swift and dramatic impacts not only overseas but also here at home, frommarkets on Wall Street to wallets on Main Street.
  
Just as advances in technology have the power to make our lives better, they also force us tocompete with other nations like never before. Tackling big challenges like terrorism andclimate change require sustained national effort, and yet too often, our politics seems asbroken, as divided as ever.
So I know that for many of you it’s an intimidating time to be marching out into the world.Everything seems so unsettled. The future may seem unclear. But as you make your way inthis ever changing world, you should take comfort in knowing that as a country, we’venavigated tougher times before. We’ve sailed stormier seas. Earlier today, I spent some timein Tuscaloosa, Alabama. And some of you have seen what happened there as a consequenceof the tornadoes that struck. The mayor and I visited a community where the devastationfrom this storm was simply heartbreaking -- entire homes and blocks just gone, wiped away.Some families lost everything. Some families lost family. 
But what was striking is the way that damaged community has come together, how they’verallied around one another. The mayor there, young man doing wonderful work, MayorMaddox, he put it best. He told me that when disasters like this strike, all our grievances seemto go away. All our differences don’t seem to matter. All our political disagreements seem sopetty. We help each other, we support one another, as one country, as one people. 
That’s the American spirit. No matter how hard we are tested, we look to our faith and ourfaith in one another. No matter what the challenge, we’ve always carried the American Dreamforward. That’s been true throughout our history. 
When bombs fell on Pearl Harbor, when an Iron Curtain fell over Europe, when the threat ofnuclear war loomed just 90 miles from this city, when a brilliant September morning wasdarkened by terror -- in none of those instances did we falter. We endured. We carried thedream forward.
We’ve gone through periods of great economic turmoil, from an economy where most peopleworked on farms to one where most people worked in factories to now one fueled byinformation and technology. Through it all, we’ve persevered. We’ve adapted. We’veprospered. Workers found their voice, and the right to organize for fair wages and safeworking conditions. We carried forward.
When waves of Irish and Italian immigrants were derided as criminals and outcasts; whenCatholics were discriminated against, or Jews had to succumb to quotas, or Muslims wereblamed for society’s ills; when blacks were treated as second-class citizens and marriages likemy own parents’ were illegal in much of the country -- we didn’t stop. We didn’t acceptinequality. We fought. We overcame. We carried the dream forward.
  
We have carried this dream forward through times when our politics seemed broken. This isnot the first time where it looked like politicians were going crazy. In heated debates over ourfounding, some warned independence would doom America to “a scene of bloody discord anddesolation for ages.” That was the warning about independence. One of our greatestPresidents, Thomas Jefferson, was labeled an “infidel” and a “howling atheist” with “fangs.”Think about that. Even I haven’t gotten that one yet. Lincoln -- Lincoln, FDR, they were bothvilified in their own times as tyrants, power hungry, bent on destroying democracy. And ofcourse, this state has seen its fair share of tightly contested elections.
And we’ve made it through those moments. None of it was easy. A lot of it was messy.Sometimes there was violence. Sometimes it took years, even decades, for us to find our waythrough. But here’s the thing. We made it through. We made it through because in each ofthose moments, we made a choice.
Rather than turn inward and wall off America from the rest of the world, we’ve chosen tostand up forcefully for the ideals and the rights we believe are universal for all men andwomen.
Rather than settle for an America where everybody is left to fend for themselves, where wethink only about our own short-term needs instead of the country that we’re leaving to ourchildren, we have chosen to build a nation where everybody has a shot at opportunity, whereeveryone can succeed.
We’ve chosen to invest in our people and in their future -- building public schools, sending ageneration to college on the GI Bill, laying highways and railroads, building ports all across thecountry.
Rather than turn on each other in times of cultural upheaval, we’ve chosen to march, toorganize, to sit-in, to turn out, to petition our government for women’s rights and votingrights and civil rights -- even in the face of fierce resistance -- because we are Americans; andno matter who we are or what we look like, we believe that in this country, all are equal, allare free.
Rather than give in to the voices suggesting we set our sights lower, downsize our dreams, orsettle for something less, we’ve chosen again and again to make America bigger, bolder, morediverse, more generous, more hopeful.
Because throughout our history, what has distinguished us from all other nations is not justour wealth, it’s not just our power. It’s been our deep commitment to individual freedom andpersonal responsibility, but also our unshakeable commitment to one another -- a recognitionthat we share a future; that we rise or fall together; that we are part of a common enterprisethat is greater, somehow, than the sum of its parts.
  
So, yes, class of 2011, change will be a constant in your lives. And that can be scary. That canbe hard. And sometimes you’ll be tempted to turn inward; to say “What’s good enough for meis good enough.” Sometimes you’ll be tempted to turn on one another; to say “My problemsare the fault of those who don’t look like me or sound like me.” Sometime you’ll be tempted togive into those voices that warn: “too hard,” “don’t try,” “no, you can’t.”
But I have faith you will reject those voices. I have faith you will reject those impulses. Yourgeneration was born into a world with fewer walls; a world educated in an era of information,tempered by war and economic turmoil. And as our globe has grown smaller and moreconnected, you’ve shed the heavy weights of earlier generations. Your generation has grownup more accepting and tolerant of people for who they are, regardless of race or gender orreligious belief; regardless of creed or sexual orientation. That’s how you’ve grown up. Yousee our diversity as a strength, not a weakness. And I believe those life experiences havefortified you, as earlier generations were fortified, to meet the tests of our time. Everything Ihave seen of your generation has shown me that you believe, as deeply as any previousgeneration, that America can always change for the better.
Class of 2011, you and your generation are now responsible for our future. I’m only going tobe President a little bit longer. You are going to be leaders for many years to come. You willhave to make choices to keep our dream alive for the next generation. Choices about whetherwe’ll stack the deck against workers and the middle class, or whether we make sure Americaremains a place where if you work hard you can get ahead.
You’re going to have to make a choice about whether we’ll say we can’t afford to educate ouryoung people and send them to college, or whether we continue to be a country that makesinvestments that are necessary to keep those young people competitive in this new century. Itwill be up to you to choose whether we’ll remain vulnerable to swings in oil prices or whetherwe invest in the clean energy that can break our dependence on oil and protect our planet. Itwill be your choice as to whether we break our promise to seniors and the poor and thedisabled and tell them to fend for themselves, or whether we keep strengthening our socialsafety net and our health care system.
And it will be up to you whether we’ll turn on one another, or whether we stay true to ourvalues of fairness and opportunity, understanding that we are a nation of immigrants --immigrants that built this country into an economic powerhouse and a beacon of hope aroundthe world.
I know this last issue generates some passion. I know that several young people here haverecently identified themselves as undocumented. Some were brought here as young children,and discovered the truth only as adults. And they’ve put their futures on the line in hopes itwill spur the rest of us to live up to our most cherished values.
  
I strongly believe we should fix our broken immigration system. Fix it so that it meets our21st-century economic and security needs. And I want to work with Democrats andRepublicans, yes, to protect our borders, and enforce our laws, and address the status ofmillions of undocumented workers. And I will keep fighting alongside many of you to make theDREAM Act the law of the land.
Like all of this country’s movements towards justice, it will be difficult and it will take time. Iknow some here wish that I could just bypass Congress and change the law myself. But that’snot how democracy works. See, democracy is hard. But it’s right.
Changing our laws means doing the hard work of changing minds and changing votes, one byone. And I am convinced we can change the laws, because we should all be able to agree thatit makes no sense to expel talented young people from our country. They grew up asAmericans. They pledge allegiance to our flag. And if they are trying to serve in our military orearn a degree, they are contributing to our future -- and we welcome those contributions.
We didn’t raise the Statue of Liberty with its back to the world; we raised it with its light tothe world. Whether your ancestors came here on the Mayflower or a slave ship; whether theysigned in at Ellis Island or they crossed the Rio Grande -- we are one people. We need oneanother. Our patriotism is not rooted in ethnicity, but in a shared belief of the enduring andpermanent promise of this country.
That’s the promise redeemed by your graduation today. That’s the promise that drew so manyof you to this college and your parents to this country. And that’s the promise that drew myown father here.
I didn’t know him well, my father -- and he lived a troubled life. But I know that when he wasaround your age, he dreamed of something more than his lot in life. He dreamed of thatmagical place; he dreamed of coming to study in America.
And when I was around your age, I traveled back to his home country of Kenya for the firsttime to learn his story. And I went to a tiny village called Alego, where his stepmother stilllives in the house where he grew up, and I visited his grave. And I asked her if there wasanything left for me to know him by. And she opened a trunk, and she took out a stack ofletters -- and this is an elderly woman who doesn’t read or write -- but she had saved theseletters, more than 30 of them, written in his hand and addressed to colleges and universitiesall across America.
They weren’t that different from the letters that I wrote when I was trying to get into college,or the ones that you wrote when you were hoping to come here. They were written in thesimple, sometimes awkward, sometimes grammatically incorrect, unmistakably hopeful voiceof somebody who is just desperate for a chance -- just desperate to live his unlikely dream.
  
And somebody at the University of Hawaii -- halfway around the world -- chose to give himthat chance. And because that person gave a young man a chance, he met a young womanfrom Kansas; they had a son in the land where all things are possible.
And one of my earliest memories from growing up in Hawaii, is of sitting on my grandfather’sshoulders to see the astronauts from one of the Apollo space missions come ashore after asuccessful splashdown. You remember that no matter how young you are as a child. It’s oneof those unforgettable moments when you first realize the miracle that is what this country iscapable of. And I remember waving a little American flag on top of my grandfather’sshoulders, thinking about those astronauts, and thinking about space.
And today, on this day, more than 40 years later, I took my daughters to the Kennedy SpaceCenter. And even though we didn’t get to see the Space Shuttle Endeavour launch, we metsome of the astronauts, and we toured the Space Shuttle Atlantis. And looking at mydaughters, I thought of how things come full circle. I thought of all that we’ve achieved as anation since I was their age, a little brown boy sitting on my grandfather’s shoulders -- and Ithought about all I want us to achieve by the time they have children of their own.
That’s my proof that the idea of America endures. That’s my evidence that our brave endeavoron this Earth continues.
And every single day I walk into the Oval Office, and for all the days of my life, I will alwaysremember that in no other nation on Earth could my story be possible, could your stories bepossible. That is something I celebrate. That is something that drives every decision I make.
So what I ask of you, graduates, as you walk out of here today is this: Pursue success. Do notfalter. When you make it, pull somebody else up. Preserve our dream. Remember your life isricher when people around you have a shot at opportunity as well. Strive to widen that circleof possibility; strive to forge that big, generous, optimistic vision of America that we inherited;strive to carry that dream forward to future generations.
Thank you. Congratulations. May God bless you. May God bless the United States of America.
