Prime Minister Abe:  [As interpreted.]  On behalf of the Japanese people, I would like toexpress my heartfelt welcome to President Barack Obama, who is in Japan as our state guest. Barack and I met at the White House for the first time last year in February.  We talked aboutall the different themes that one could think of.  We had talks without reserve and weconfirmed that we had the same awareness with regard to issues and that we share commonobjectives.
The Japan-U.S. alliance has been revived very strongly.  And the nature of our talks this timewas such that we were able to demonstrate this both inside and outside of the country. Barack said this before -- to create a large economic zone in the Asia Pacific would bring aboutmajor benefits to Japan, the United States, and to the Asian nations. 
The TPP was indeed a very farsighted plan.  As a result of serious exchanges between Barackand myself, Japan was able to make the transition to the next stage, which was to participatein the TPP talks.  It’s been one year since then and Japan along with the United States is in arole to lead in a major way the TPP talks.  To make the talks between the two leaders amilestone and so as to resolve pending issues between our two countries, Minister Amari andU.S. Trade Representative Ambassador Froman decided that they would energetically andearnestly continue the talks. 
  
President Obama and I instructed the ministers to continue these talks so as to bring to aconclusion the remaining issues and so as to bring about a major conclusion of the TPP talksas a whole.  Today and tomorrow, the talks will continue.  So the joint statement released willsee the result of this and we will formulate a joint statement after this. 
Between Japan and the United States, we share values such as freedom, democracy, humanrights and rule of law.  We have shared these basic values and strategic interests.  We areglobal partners.  So we have this partnership and this strong alliance between our twocountries.  It’s the cornerstone of peace and prosperity in the Asia Pacific region. 
Japan espouses the principle of proactive contribution to peace.  And the United States ismoving forward with its policy of pivoting to the Asia Pacific.  These are contributing to peaceand stability in the region.  And we mutually appreciated and welcomed each other’s policies. Having done so between Barack and myself, we were able to confirm that the Japan-U.S.alliance would play a leading role in ensuring peace and prosperity of the Asia Pacific.  This iswhat I wanted to communicate to you. 
With regard to security, including the review of the Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperationguidelines, wide-ranging security and defensive cooperation would be promoted.  We agreedon this point.  With regard to the realignment of U.S. forces in Japan, including the transfer ofU.S. Marines in Okinawa to Guam and relocation of the Futenma Air Station, we would makesteady progress on this front.  And we reaffirmed the resolve on both sides to make thistranspire. 
Okinawa Governor Nakaima has requested termination of the operation of the Futenma AirStation in five years or less.  With regard to this and other requests by the Governor, Iexplained this to President Barack and requested further cooperation from the United Statesto alleviate the impact on Okinawa.  
With regard to various issues which the international society is facing, we had a heart-to-hearttalk between Barack and myself.  On the situation in Ukraine, changing the status quo againstthe backdrop of coercion and intimidation would not be condoned.  We confirmed this pointonce again, and the importance to providing support to Ukraine and to cooperate betweenJapan and the G7 is something that we agreed on.
With regard to China, based on the rule of law, a free and open Asia Pacific region will bedeveloped and we would try to engage China in this region.  And we agreed to cooperatetoward this end.  With regard to moves to try to change the status quo through coercion andintimidation, we agreed that we would clearly oppose such news.  Going forward with regardto policies vis-à-vis China, we agreed to maintain close cooperation between Japan and theUnited States.  This was confirmed.
  
On the DPRK, we confirmed that close cooperation between the U.S., Japan and ROK wouldcontinue to be important.  And this time Barack made the time to meet with the Yokotas andMr. Iizuka.  At our talks, I requested understanding, and continued understanding andcooperation toward the resolution of the abduction issue and the President expressed hissupport. 
This month I met three times with Ambassador Kennedy.  I had this honor.  We discussedspace, linear and cultural exchanges, and so this is a manifestation of the best of thecooperative relationship which exists between our two countries.  In the talks between theleaders, I put forth once again the proposal to introduce Maglev technology in the UnitedStates.  We had an exchange of views with regard to energy cooperation, and inclusive of asociety where women can shine, and global issues. We agreed that we would cooperate onthese issues. 
Ambassador Kennedy is a symbol of the friendship which exists between our two countriesand the bonds which exist.  I’d like to cooperate even more closely with the Ambassador tofurther deepen cooperative relations between our two countries.
Going forward, what supports the alliance are the youth in both of our countries.  To furtherenhance exchanges between youth I have told Barack of our plans to send 6,000 Japanesestudents to the United States this fiscal year.  The Japan-U.S. alliance is more robust thanever before. 
Barack, you talked about the sushi you had last night and you said it was the best you had inyour life.  We had heart-to-heart talks for an hour and a half.  We talked about issuesbetween our two countries and challenges of the world.  We confirmed the bonds and theroles of our two countries and we talked about further potential of the relationship betweenour two countries.  It was a very enriching and satisfactory time.  And the sushi I hadyesterday, for me, too, was the best I had in my life so far, and it is without a doubt that thisis the case.
So, between Barack and I, we want to make U.S.-Japan relations more favorable than everbefore.  And that is all for me.  Thank you.
President Obama:  Konnichiwa.  I want to thank Prime Minister Abe for your kind words andyour warm welcome, as well as the outstanding sushi and sake yesterday.  It is wonderful tobe back in Japan.  This is my third visit as President.  I’m deeply honored to be making thefirst state visit by a U.S. President in nearly two decades.  I’m grateful to Their Majesties, theEmperor and Empress, for their gracious welcome this morning.  And I've once again beentouched by the kindness and hospitality of the Japanese people -- your omotenashi. 
  
I’ve said many times the United States is and always will be a Pacific nation.  America’ssecurity and prosperity is inseparable from the future of this region, and that’s why I’ve madeit a priority to renew American leadership in the Asia Pacific.  And the cornerstone of ourstrategy -- and the foundation of the region’s security and economic progress -- is our historictreaty alliances, including with Japan. 
Prime Minister Abe, I want to thank you for your exceptional commitment to our alliance,which in recent years has grown even stronger.  Under your leadership, Japan is also lookingto make even greater contributions to peace and security around the world, which the UnitedStates very much welcomes. 
And last night we had an excellent discussion on a whole range of issues.  We agreed tocontinue deepening our security cooperation.  We continue to make progress towardsrealigning our forces in the region, including Okinawa, which will lessen the impact of ourbases on local communities.  As we modernize our defense posture in the region, our forces inJapan will include our most advanced military capabilities. 
We stand together in calling for disputes in the region, including maritime issues, to beresolved peacefully through dialogue.  We share a commitment to fundamental principles suchas freedom of navigation and respect for international law.  And let me reiterate that ourtreaty commitment to Japan’s security is absolute, and Article 5 covers all territories underJapan’s administration, including the Senkaku Islands.
Our two nations are united along with the Republic of Korea in our determination to bringabout the peaceful denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and in our firm response to NorthKorea’s provocations.  And we stand with Japan as it seeks to resolve the tragedy of NorthKorea’s abductions of Japanese citizens. 
Beyond Northeast Asia, Japan and the United States are working together to enhance oureconomic and diplomatic and security coordination with our ASEAN partners in Southeast Asia.We’re deepening our cooperation as global partners, from the relief we delivered togetherafter the typhoon in the Philippines last year to our unified response to Russia’s militaryintervention in Ukraine.  
We made important progress in the Trans-Pacific Partnership, TPP, which will support goodjobs and growth in the United States as well as economic reform and revitalization here inJapan.  We’re closer to agreement on issues like automobiles and agriculture.  I’ve been veryclear and honest that American manufacturers and farmers need to have meaningful access tomarkets that are included under TPP, including here in Japan.  That’s what will make it a gooddeal for America -- for our workers and our consumers, and our families.  That’s my bottomline, and I can’t accept anything less.
  
At the same time, Prime Minister Abe is committed to renewing Japan’s economy, and TPP is avital part of that.  As I’ve told Shinzo, Japan has the opportunity -- in part through TPP -- toplay a key leadership role in the Asia Pacific region for this century.  So now is the time forbold steps that are needed to reach a comprehensive agreement, and I continue to believe wecan get this done.
I would add that our countries are more prosperous when we tap the talents of all of ourcitizens.  So I want to commend the Prime Minister for his commitment to bringing morewomen into the work force.  And because our economic security also depends on energysecurity, we’re going to keep working together on clean and efficient alternatives to fossilfuels both at home and abroad that can power the global economy while combating climatechange. 
Finally, I’m pleased that we continue to deepen the extraordinary ties between our people,especially our young people, like the Japanese students that I’ll be meeting later today.  AndI’m proud to announce that we’re launching a new program that will help even more Japanesestudents come to the United States to improve their English-language skills and gain valuableexperience working in American businesses and organizations.  And that’s part of our effort todouble student exchanges by 2020 -- bonds among our young people that can bring us closertogether for decades to come.  
So, Prime Minister Abe, thank you for your friendship, your partnership, and the progress thatwe’ve made together.  I want to thank you and the people of Japan for being suchextraordinary allies.  Standing together, I have no doubt about what our nations can achieve. So as you say here, ganbarou.  Thank you.
Question:  I’d like to raise a question with regard to security.  First, my question is addressedto Prime Minister Abe.  President Obama, with regard to the defense of the Senkaku Islands,he had clearly stated his security stance based on the security treaty. And what kind ofdiscussion did you have on the exercise of collective security rights? 
To President Obama, the following question:  Based on the security treaty, the obligation todefend the Senkaku Islands, this is the first time that you referred to this issue.  Why did youmention this?  Could you talk about the import of your statement?
Prime Minister Abe:  [As interpreted.]  Through the talks with President Obama, asPresident Obama mentioned at the outset in his speech, between our two countries we havethe security treaty and under the security treaty, all of the abilities and capabilities to performthe commitment is provided.  And this includes all territories under the administration ofJapan, inclusive of the Senkaku Islands.  And any unilateral action to undermine Japan’sadministration of the Senkaku Islands will be opposed by the United States.  We agreed onthis point.
  
On the exercise of the right of collective defense, presently in Japan the legal basis forsecurity is being discussed and with regard to the stability of Japan and regional safety andstability, and to function the alliance effectively, and to contribute to the stability of the regionwe are making these studies.  This is what I have explained to President Obama. Concerningsuch studies and examinations being made in Japan, this was welcomed and this would besupported.  That was the position expressed by President Obama. 
President Obama:  Our position is not new.  Secretary Hagel, our Defense Secretary, whenhe visited here, Secretary of State John Kerry when he visited here, both indicated what hasbeen our consistent position throughout.  We don’t take a position on final sovereigntydeterminations with respect to Senkakus, but historically they have been administered byJapan and we do not believe that they should be subject to change unilaterally.  And what is aconsistent part of the alliance is that the treaty covers all territories administered by Japan. So this is not a new position, this is a consistent one.
In our discussions, I emphasized with Prime Minister Abe the importance of resolving thisissue peacefully -- not escalating the situation, keeping the rhetoric low, not takingprovocative actions, and trying to determine how both Japan and China can workcooperatively together.  And I want to make that larger point.  We have strong relations withChina.  They are a critical country not just to the region, but to the world. 
Obviously, with a huge population, a growing economy, we want to continue to encourage thepeaceful rise of China.  I think there’s enormous opportunities for trade, development,working on common issues like climate change with China.  But what we’ve also emphasized -
- and I will continue to emphasize throughout this trip -- is that all of us have responsibilitiesto help maintain basic rules of the road and an international order so that large countries,small countries, all have to abide by what is considered just and fair, and that we areresolving disputes in peaceful fashion. 
And this is a message that I’ve delivered directly to the Chinese and it’s one that I think isentirely consistent with China being successful.  I think the alternative is a situation in whichlarge countries, like the United States or China or Russia or other countries, feel as ifwhenever they think it’s expedient they can take actions that disadvantage smaller countries,and that’s not the kind of world that is going to be stable and prosperous and secure over thelong term. 
So we are invested in an international order, and that applies to a whole range of issues,including maritime issues.  My hope is, is that China will continue to engage with us and othercountries in the region where we do not take a position on the particular sovereignty of thispiece of land or this rock but we do take a position in making sure that all countries arefollowing basic international procedures in resolving these disputes.  And if that happens, thenI think not only will China be successful, but I think there’s a great potential for Chinese andJapanese cooperation, Chinese and Vietnamese cooperation, cooperation with the Philippinesand China -- all of which will benefit the peoples of the region.
  
Mr. Carney:  The next question comes from Jim Acosta of CNN.
Question:  Thank you, Mr. President.  Arigato, Mr. Prime Minister. Mr. President, in regards tothe Senkaku Islands, I just want to make sure that this is absolutely clear.  Are you sayingthat the U.S. would consider using military force were China to have some sort of militaryincursion in those islands to protect those islands?  And how does that not draw another redline that you would have to enforce -- of putting U.S. credibility, your credibility on the lineonce again, as it was in the case with Syria and Russia?  And on another key security issue,you mentioned North Korea in your meeting with the Prime Minister.  Are you issuing awarning to North Korea that there should not be another nuclear test?
And to Prime Minister Abe, do you have confidence in President Obama’s assurances aboutyour security when the U.S. and the West were unable to stop Russia’s advances in Ukraine? Thank you.
President Obama:  Well, Jim, let me unpack that question because there’s a whole bunch ofassumptions in there, some of which I don’t agree with. 
First of all, the treaty between the United States and Japan preceded my birth, so obviously,this isn’t a “red line” that I’m drawing; it is the standard interpretation over multipleadministrations of the terms of the alliance, which is that territories under the administrationof Japan are covered under the treaty.  There’s no shift in position.  There’s no “red line”that’s been drawn.  We’re simply applying the treaty.
At the same time, as I’ve said directly to the Prime Minister that it would be a profoundmistake to continue to see escalation around this issue rather than dialogue and confidence-
building measures between Japan and China.  And we’re going to do everything we can toencourage that diplomatically. 
With respect to the other issues that you raise, our position, Jim, the United States’ position isthat countries should abide by international law; that those laws, those rules, those norms areviolated when you gas children, or when you invade the territory of another country.  Now,the implication of the question I think is, is that each and every time a country violates one ofthose norms the United States should go to war, or stand prepared to engage militarily, and ifit doesn’t then somehow we’re not serious about those norms.  Well, that’s not the case.
Right now, we have 87 percent of serious chemical weapons have already been removed fromSyria.  There’s about 13 percent left.  That’s as a consequence of U.S. leadership.  And thefact that we didn’t have to fire a missile to get that accomplished is not a failure to upholdthose international norms, it’s a success.  It’s not a complete success until we have the last 13percent out. 
  
With respect to Russia and Ukraine, we’ve been very clear about the fact that there’s notgoing to be a military solution to the problem in Ukraine, but we have already appliedsanctions that have had an impact on the Russian economy and we have continued to holdout the prospect, the possibility to resolve this issue diplomatically.  There was somepossibility that Russia could take the wiser course after the meetings in Geneva. So far, atleast, we have seen them not abide by the spirit or the letter of the agreement in Geneva. And instead, we continue to see militias and armed men taking over buildings, harassing folkswho are disagreeing with them, and destabilizing the region, and we haven’t seen Russia stepup and discourage that. 
On the other side, you’ve seen the government in Kyiv take very concrete steps, inintroducing an amnesty law and offering a whole range of reforms with respect to theconstitution, that are consistent with what was discussed in Geneva.  And my expectation is,is that if, once again, Russia fails to abide by both the spirit and the letter of what wasdiscussed in Geneva, that there will be further consequences and we will ramp up furthersanctions. 
That doesn’t mean that the problem is going to be solved right away.  These are difficultissues.  But what we try to do is to make sure that we are very clear about what we stand for,what we believe in, and we are willing to take actions on behalf of those values, those norms,and those ideals.
Question:  And on North Korea?
President Obama:  And the question was? 
Question:  Is there a warning to North Korea to not conduct another nuclear test?
President Obama:  North Korea has engaged in provocative actions for the last severaldecades.  It’s been an irresponsible actor on the international stage for the last severaldecades.  So our message on North Korea has been consistent throughout.  They are the mostisolated country in the world.  They are subject to more international sanctions andinternational condemnation than any country in the world.  As a consequence, their peoplesuffer as much as any peoples in the world.
And what we’ve said is if you are, in fact, serious about North Korea being a normal nation,then you’ve got to start changing your behavior.  And that starts with the basic principle ofdenuclearizing the Korean Peninsula. 
Now, am I optimistic that there’s going to be a major strategic shift in North Korea’s attitudesany time soon?  Probably not.  But what I am confident about is, is that working with Japan,working with the Republic of Korea, and working with China and other interested parties in theregion, that we can continue to apply more and more pressure on North Korea so that atsome juncture they end up taking a different course.
  
In the meantime, they’re dangerous, and we have to make sure that we are guarding againstany provocations getting out of hand.  This is one of the reasons why the alliance is soimportant and collective self-defense is so important.  But we are not surprised when theyengage in irresponsible behavior.  That’s been their pattern for the last couple of decades. And what we have to do is to continue to try to contain and mitigate the potential damagethat this behavior has and continue to put pressure on them so that we can see a shift.
And China’s participation in pushing the DPRK in a different direction is critically important aswell.  They have not only an opportunity but I think a security interest and a broader interestin a peaceful resolution to what has been a generation-long conflict and is the mostdestabilizing, dangerous situation in all of the Asia Pacific region. 
Prime Minister Abe:  [As interpreted.]  First of all, I would like to state the following:  TheJapan-U.S. alliance is unwavering and it’s indispensable to maintain the Asia Pacific regionpeaceful and stable.  The Japan-U.S. alliance and the relationship and the strengtheningthereof is very beneficial.  And to strengthen our bilateral relationship, you have tremendousenthusiasm.  I believe in that.  And your enthusiasm and the United States’ is what we placeour confidence in.  And in the talks between us today that confidence became even stronger. This is something that I wished to mention to you. 
And the alliance between our two countries in order to strengthen this -- or if we strengthenthis, this is not applying pressure to other countries or intimidating other countries.  This is forthe peace and stability of the region and to strengthen this and to make this region a law-
abiding region. Changes of the status quo based on intimidation and coercion will not becondoned.  We want to make this a peaceful region which values laws, and in doing thisstrengthening of our bilateral alliance is extremely important.  On this point, I fully trustPresident Obama. 
The reporter has mentioned the situation in Ukraine.  In The Hague the G7 meeting tookplace, and President Obama exerted strong leadership and the G7 was united in its approachtoward Russia.  Annexation of Crimea in violation of the international laws would not becondoned -- that was the message which was generated to Russia.  We would continue tocommunicate information -- message under the leadership of President Obama to Russia. 
And with regard to the DPRK, unless they change the present policies there is no future forthe public in the DPRK.  We need to make the DPRK understand this and pressure must beapplied with cooperation between the international society to achieve this.  And China holdsthe key to this.  Japan, the United States, and ROK must exercise its influence over China.
With regard to the Asia Pacific region as well as international society, there are variouschallenges and the alliance must continue to be robust so that we can cooperate to resolveissues in Asia and in the world.
  
Question:  On the TPP, I’d like to ask the question to the two leaders.  First to Prime MinisterAbe, regarding TPP -- negotiations and consultations are to continue, you have said.  What arethe remaining issues?  And to what extent have you made progress at the Diet?  With regardto the five sensitive items they resolve that in this stage the elimination of tariffs would not beaccepted.  Do you believe under such circumstances an agreement can be reached? 
The next question to President Obama.  Japan, with regard to rice and wheat and beef andpork, is very careful about reducing tariffs.  What is your view on this for agreement betweenJapan and the United States?  Agriculture, produce tariffs -- what is the ideal resolution to thisissue in your view, please?
Prime Minister Abe:  [As interpreted.]  On the TPP, this is to create a major economic zonein the growth area of Asia -- basic human rights, rule of law, and democracy with countriesthat share these values.  We will be creating new rules and it is for this purpose.  It is the21st-century type of economic zone which we wish to create.  For the region as a whole, it’sstrategically very important, and we see eye-to-eye on this point between President Obamaand myself. 
The remaining issues must be overcome very quickly and resolved so that TPP as a whole canbe concluded.  We should cooperate and exert further leadership.  And that is the task thatPresident Obama and I have, I believe.  And from a broad perspective, along with PresidentObama, we want to make decisions and judgments.  On the part of our country, there is thisresolution adopted by the Diet.  We will take the proper heed of this so that we will choose thepath in the best interest of the country.  But we also hope to conclude the talks in a favorableway.  We want to try to achieve conclusion of the talks as a whole.
President Obama:  I will leave the details of the negotiations to the negotiators.  I think it’sfair to say that there are certain sectors of the Japanese economy -- agricultural sectors, theauto sector -- in which market access has been restricted historically, certainly compared tothe market access that Japan has had to U.S. consumers.  And those are all issues that peopleare all familiar with, and at some point have to be resolved.  I believe that point is now. 
Prime Minister Abe, I think courageously, has recognized that although Japan continues to beone of the most powerful economies in the world, that over the last two decades its pace ofgrowth and innovation had stalled and that if, in fact, Japan wanted to push forward in thisnew century then reforms were going to have to take place.  And he has initiated a number ofthose reforms.
TPP is consistent with those reforms.  And as Prime Minister Abe said, there’s strategicimportance to this because what’s happening now is we’re shaping the economic environmentfor the fastest-growing region in the world, not just for this year or next year, but potentiallyfor this decade and the next decade.
  
And what rules apply -- whether we are operating in a fair and transparent way, whetherintellectual property is respected, whether markets are freely accessible, whether, in fact,countries are able to increase trade and as a consequence, increase jobs and prosperity fortheir people -- a lot of that is going to depend on choices and decisions that we make rightnow. TPP is an opportunity for us to make that happen.
Now, there are always political sensitivities in any kind of trade discussions.  Prime MinisterAbe has got to deal with his politics; I’ve got to deal with mine.  And I think that Congress haspassed, for example, recently a free trade agreement with the Republic of Korea and othercountries around the world, and it’s been based on notions of reciprocity and notions that ifwe tear down some of these existing barriers that both countries can do better, both countriescan grow. 
This is even more challenging because we have more countries involved.  But my basis fordoing this is because, ultimately, I think it’s good for America to have a Asia Pacific regionwhere our companies can innovate, can compete, can sell our goods and services freely,where our intellectual property is protected. And I think that’s going to create more jobs in theUnited States.  It’s going to create greater prosperity in the United States.  But it’s a win-winsituation, because I think the same is going to be true for Japan, the same is going to be truefor Malaysia, the same is going to be true for Vietnam, the same is going to be true for theother countries that are in this discussion. 
But that means that short term, all of us have to move out of our comfort zones and not justexpect that we’re going to get access to somebody else’s market without providing access toour own.  And it means that we have to sometimes push our constituencies beyond theircurrent comfort levels because ultimately it’s going to deliver a greater good for all people.
Mr. Carney:  Julie Pace of the Associated Press has the final question.
Question:  I wanted to go back to the situation in Ukraine.  You said that Russia is so far notabiding by the Geneva agreement, but you appeared to indicate that you have not made adecision yet on levying further sanctions.  So, first, can you just clarify whether you have orhave not made that decision?  And if you have not, what gives you confidence that holding offon further sanctions might change Russia’s calculus?  And couldn’t they just be using theGeneva agreement as a stalling tactic as they weigh military options or try to influence theMay Ukraine elections? 
And, Prime Minister Abe, there are historical disputes in Asia that are a powerful source oftension and instability in this region.  What responsibility do you and other leaders in Asiahave to avoid inflammatory language or actions, including further visits to the Yasukuni Shrinethat could further exacerbate these tensions?  Thank you.
  
President Obama:  Well, Julie, we have been consistently preparing for the possibility that,in fact, Geneva didn’t deliver on its promise.  I think you’ll remember I was asked the day thatthe discussions had concluded what my hopes were and I said, well, I’m not overly optimisticabout the ability to deliver.  And so what that means is that we have been preparing for theprospect that we’re going to have to engage in further sanctions.  Those are teed up. 
It requires some technical work and it also requires coordination with other countries.  So thefact that I haven’t announced them yet doesn’t mean that they haven’t been prepared andteed up.  At the point where they are ready to go, I guarantee you AP is going to be the firstto know.
Question:  I’ll hold you to that.
President Obama:  But I think it’s important to emphasize that throughout this process, ourgoal has been to change Mr. Putin’s calculus; that our preference is to resolve this issuediplomatically; that sanctions hurt Russia more than anybody else but they’re disruptive to theglobal economy and they’re unnecessary if, in fact, Russia would recognize that thegovernment in Kyiv is prepared to have serious negotiations that preserve the rights of allUkrainians, including Russian speakers, and is prepared to decentralize in ways that,originally, Mr. Putin said were of utmost importance to him. 
So far, at least, they have not chosen the wise path.  And over the medium and long term,this is going to hurt Russia as much as it hurts Ukraine.  Already you’ve seen a whole lot ofmoney, a whole lot of foreign investors leaving Russia because they don’t see this as a reliableplace to invest.  And Russia needs to reform its economy and needs to diversify its economybecause the rest of the world is moving further and further off the fossil fuels that are theprimary way that Russia is able to bankroll itself.  And the decisions right now that are beingmade in Ukraine will not help that process; it will hinder it. 
Now, I understand that additional sanctions may not change Mr. Putin’s calculus -- that’spossible.  How well they change his calculus in part depends on not just us applying sanctionsbut also the cooperation of other countries.  And that’s why there’s got to be a lot ofdiplomatic spadework done at each phase of this process. 
And in discussions that I’ve had with Prime Minister Abe, in discussions that I had with myEuropean counterparts, my consistent point has been there’s some things the United Statescan do alone, but ultimately it’s going to have to be a joint effort, a collective effort.  And sowhile we’ve done our homework and we have things teed up, it’s also important for us tomake sure that we’re in consultation with all these countries each and every time that weapply additional sanctions.
Question:  Can I clarify? 
President Obama:  Sure.
  
Question:  Are you saying that you have made a decision to apply further sanctions but youjust have to wait for a technical process to play out?  Or are you saying you have not madethe decision yet to levy those sanctions?
President Obama:  What I’m saying is, is that we have prepared for the possibility ofapplying additional sanctions, that there are a whole bunch of technical issues behind that; that there’s always the possibility that Russia, tomorrow or the next day, reverses course andtakes a different approach -- which, by the way, would simply involve them stating clearlythat they actually believe in what they said in Geneva, that they actually call on those who areholding buildings in the south and eastern Ukraine to get out of those buildings, that they areencouraged by the willingness of the Kyiv government to follow through on amnesty, thatthey allow OSCE monitors in and that they support an election process where Ukrainians areable to make their own decisions.  So it wouldn’t require a radical shift.  It would require thekinds of steps that on paper, at least they already agreed to as recently as last week.
Do I think they’re going to do that?  So far, the evidence doesn’t make me hopeful.  And Ithink it’s fair to say that, as we’ve said earlier this week, this is a matter of days and notweeks.  Assuming that they do not follow through, we will follow through on what we said,which is that there will be additional consequences on the Russians.
Prime Minister Abe:  [As interpreted.]  First of all, my basic recognition of history is suchthat politicians have to have a sense of humility when it comes to history.  Japan, 70 yearsago in the war -- when the war ended, to many persons especially persons in Asia, we hadinflicted tremendous damage and pain.  And we have reflected on this, and we started ourwork after the war.  For 70 years, as a peace-loving nation we have steadily shed the past,and that is Japan and that is the Japanese public.
Ever since we were poor we tried to contribute to Asia.  We made our maximum efforts, evenwhen we were poor.  And many nations in Asia have evaluated highly Japan’s work.  In theAbe government, there is no change in stance compared to previous governments.  Lastyear’s end, I visited Yasukuni, and to those that have fought for the country and that havebeen wounded, that have passed away, I have prayed and prayed for the souls of suchpersons.  That was the purpose of my visit to the shrine. 
And many leaders of the world share this common attitude, I believe.  And at the same time,in Yasukuni Shrine there is a remembrance memorial called Chinreisha, and I visited thismemorial.  This has not been reported much, but in this memorial, those who have passedaway as a result of the war, not only Japanese, but those from all over the world honoredthere.  So I have visited this memorial so that never again people would suffer in wars.  Irenewed my resolve to create such a society and such a world and I have renewed my pledgenot to engage in war.  And I have released a statement to that effect.
  
With regard to my basic thinking, I will continue to explain and make efforts so that peoplewill understand.  I should like to accumulate such efforts.  After the war, in order to create ademocratic and free nation, we have made tremendous efforts and we have respected humanrights and we have valued the rule of law not only in Japan, but in the world.  We want toincrease regions of this kind. 
And so, we would like to accumulate efforts toward this end -- a peaceful and a prosperousworld.  In order to build such a world, we would like to contribute.  And by so doing, I hopethat many countries of the world would understand.
