Today we say goodbye to the youngest child of Rose and Joseph Kennedy. The world will long remembertheir son Edward as the heir to a weighty legacy; a champion for those who had none; the soul of theDemocratic Party; and the lion of the U.S. Senate -- a man whose name graces nearly one thousand laws,and who penned more than three hundred himself. 
But those of us who loved him, and ache with his passing, know Ted Kennedy by the other titles he held:Father. Brother. Husband. Uncle Teddy, or as he was often known to his younger nieces and nephews,"The Grand Fromage," or "The Big Cheese." I, like so many others in the city where he worked for nearlyhalf a century, knew him as a colleague, a mentor, and above all, a friend.
Ted Kennedy was the baby of the family who became its patriarch; the restless dreamer who became itsrock. He was the sunny, joyful child, who bore the brunt of his brothers' teasing, but learned quickly how tobrush it off. When they tossed him off a boat because he didn't know what a jib was, six-year-old Teddy gotback in and learned to sail. When a photographer asked the newly-elected Bobby to step back at a pressconference because he was casting a shadow on his younger brother, Teddy quipped, "It'll be the same inWashington."
This spirit of resilience and good humor would see Ted Kennedy through more pain and tragedy than mostof us will ever know. He lost two siblings by the age of sixteen. He saw two more taken violently from thecountry that loved them. He said goodbye to his beloved sister, Eunice, in the final days of his own life. Henarrowly survived a plane crash, watched two children struggle with cancer, buried three nephews, andexperienced personal failings and setbacks in the most public way possible. 

It is a string of events that would have broken a lesser man. And it would have been easy for Teddy to lethimself become bitter and hardened; to surrender to self-pity and regret; to retreat from public life and liveout his years in peaceful quiet. No one would have blamed him for that. 
But that was not Ted Kennedy. As he told us, "...Individual faults and frailties are no excuse to give in - andno exemption from the common obligation to give of ourselves." Indeed, Ted was the "Happy Warrior" thatthe poet William Wordsworth spoke of when he wrote:
As tempted more; more able to endure,
As more exposed to suffering and distress;
Thence, also, more alive to tenderness.
Through his own suffering, Ted Kennedy became more alive to the plight and suffering of others -- the sickchild who could not see a doctor; the young soldier sent to battle without armor; the citizen denied her rightsbecause of what she looks like or who she loves or where she comes from. The landmark laws that hechampioned -- the Civil Rights Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, immigration reform, children's healthcare, the Family and Medical Leave Act -- all have a running thread. Ted Kennedy's life's work was not tochampion those with wealth or power or special connections. It was to give a voice to those who were notheard; to add a rung to the ladder of opportunity; to make real the dream of our founding. He was given thegift of time that his brothers were not, and he used that gift to touch as many lives and right as many wrongsas the years would allow. 
We can still hear his voice bellowing through the Senate chamber, face reddened, fist pounding the podium,a veritable force of nature, in support of health care or workers' rights or civil rights. And yet, while hiscauses became deeply personal, his disagreements never did. While he was seen by his fiercest critics as apartisan lightning rod, that is not the prism through which Ted Kennedy saw the world, nor was it the prismthrough which his colleagues saw him. He was a product of an age when the joy and nobility of politicsprevented differences of party and philosophy from becoming barriers to cooperation and mutual respect --a time when adversaries still saw each other as patriots. 
And that's how Ted Kennedy became the greatest legislator of our time. He did it by hewing to principle, butalso by seeking compromise and common cause -- not through deal-making and horse-trading alone, butthrough friendship, and kindness, and humor. There was the time he courted Orrin Hatch's support for theChildren's Health Insurance Program by having his Chief of Staff serenade the Senator with a song Orrinhad written himself; the time he delivered shamrock cookies on a china plate to sweeten up a crustyRepublican colleague; and the famous story of how he won the support of a Texas Committee Chairman onan immigration bill. Teddy walked into a meeting with a plain manila envelope, and showed only theChairman that it was filled with the Texan's favorite cigars. When the negotiations were going well, he wouldinch the envelope closer to the Chairman. When they weren't, he would pull it back. Before long, the dealwas done.

It was only a few years ago, on St. Patrick's Day, when Teddy buttonholed me on the floor of the Senate formy support on a certain piece of legislation that was coming up for vote. I gave him my pledge, butexpressed my skepticism that it would pass. But when the roll call was over, the bill garnered the votes itneeded, and then some. I looked at Teddy with astonishment and asked how he had pulled it off. He justpatted me on the back, and said "Luck of the Irish!"
Of course, luck had little to do with Ted Kennedy's legislative success, and he knew that. A few years ago,his father-in-law told him that he and Daniel Webster just might be the two greatest senators of all time.Without missing a beat, Teddy replied, "What did Webster do?"
But though it is Ted Kennedy's historic body of achievements we will remember, it is his giving heart that wewill miss. It was the friend and colleague who was always the first to pick up the phone and say, "I'm sorryfor your loss," or "I hope you feel better," or "What can I do to help?" It was the boss who was so adored byhis staff that over five hundred spanning five decades showed up for his 75th birthday party. It was the manwho sent birthday wishes and thank you notes and even his own paintings to so many who never imaginedthat a U.S. Senator would take the time to think about someone like them. I have one of those paintings inmy private study -- a Cape Cod seascape that was a gift to a freshman legislator who happened to admire itwhen Ted Kennedy welcomed him into his office the first week he arrived in Washington; by the way, that'smy second favorite gift from Teddy and Vicki after our dog Bo. And it seems like everyone has one of thosestories - the ones that often start with "You wouldn't believe who called me today."
Ted Kennedy was the father who looked after not only his own three children, but John's and Bobby's aswell. He took them camping and taught them to sail. He laughed and danced with them at birthdays andweddings; cried and mourned with them through hardship and tragedy; and passed on that same sense ofservice and selflessness that his parents had instilled in him. Shortly after Ted walked Caroline down theaisle and gave her away at the altar, he received a note from Jackie that read, "On you the carefreeyoungest brother fell a burden a hero would have begged to be spared. We are all going to make it becauseyou were always there with your love."
Not only did the Kennedy family make it because of Ted's love -- he made it because of theirs; andespecially because of the love and the life he found in Vicki. After so much loss and so much sorrow, itcould not have been easy for Ted Kennedy to risk his heart again. That he did is a testament to how deeplyhe loved this remarkable woman from Louisiana. And she didn't just love him back. As Ted would oftenacknowledge, Vicki saved him. She gave him strength and purpose; joy and friendship; and stood by himalways, especially in those last, hardest days. 
We cannot know for certain how long we have here. We cannot foresee the trials or misfortunes that will testus along the way. We cannot know God's plan for us. 
What we can do is to live out our lives as best we can with purpose, and love, and joy. We can use eachday to show those who are closest to us how much we care about them, and treat others with the kindnessand respect that we wish for ourselves. We can learn from our mistakes and grow from our failures. And wecan strive at all costs to make a better world, so that someday, if we are blessed with the chance to lookback on our time here, we can know that we spent it well; that we made a difference; that our fleetingpresence had a lasting impact on the lives of other human beings.

This is how Ted Kennedy lived. This is his legacy. He once said of his brother Bobby that he need not beidealized or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life, and I imagine he would say the same abouthimself. The greatest expectations were placed upon Ted Kennedy's shoulders because of who he was, buthe surpassed them all because of who he became. We do not weep for him today because of the prestigeattached to his name or his office. We weep because we loved this kind and tender hero who perseveredthrough pain and tragedy -- not for the sake of ambition or vanity; not for wealth or power; but only for thepeople and the country he loved. 
In the days after September 11th, Teddy made it a point to personally call each one of the 177 families ofthis state who lost a loved one in the attack. But he didn't stop there. He kept calling and checking up onthem. He fought through red tape to get them assistance and grief counseling. He invited them sailing,played with their children, and would write each family a letter whenever the anniversary of that terrible daycame along. To one widow, he wrote the following:
As you know so well, the passage of time never really heals the tragic memory of such a great loss,but we carry on, because we have to, because our loved one would want us to, and because thereis still light to guide us in the world from the love they gave us.
We carry on. 
Ted Kennedy has gone home now, guided by his faith and by the light of those he has loved and lost. At lasthe is with them once more, leaving those of us who grieve his passing with the memories he gave, the goodhe did, the dream he kept alive, and a single, enduring image -- the image of a man on a boat; white manetousled; smiling broadly as he sails into the wind, ready for what storms may come, carrying on towardsome new and wondrous place just beyond the horizon. May God Bless Ted Kennedy, and may he rest ineternal peace.