Thank you so much. Good afternoon. I am honored to be in the timeless city of Cairo, and tobe hosted by two remarkable institutions. For over a thousand years, Al-Azhar has stood as abeacon of Islamic learning; and for over a century, Cairo University has been a source ofEgypt's advancement. And together, you represent the harmony between tradition andprogress. I'm grateful for your hospitality and the hospitality of the people of Egypt. And I'malso proud to carry with me the goodwill of the American people, and a greeting of peace fromMuslim communities in my country: Assalaamu alaykum [Peace be upon you].
We meet at a time of great tension between the United States and Muslims around the world,tension rooted in historical forces that go beyond any current policy debate. The relationshipbetween Islam and the West includes centuries of coexistence and cooperation, but alsoconflict and religious wars. More recently, tension has been fed by colonialism that deniedrights and opportunities to many Muslims, and a Cold War in which Muslim-majority countrieswere too often treated as proxies without regard to their own aspirations. Moreover, thesweeping change brought by modernity and globalization led many Muslims to view the Westas hostile to the traditions of Islam.
Violent extremists have exploited these tensions in a small but potent minority ofMuslims. The attacks of September 11, 2001 and the continued efforts of these extremists toengage in violence against civilians has led some in my country to view Islam as inevitablyhostile not only to America and Western countries, but also to human rights. All this has bredmore fear and more mistrust.

So long as our relationship is defined by our differences, we will empower those who sowhatred rather than peace, those who promote conflict rather than the cooperation that canhelp all of our people achieve justice and prosperity. And this cycle of suspicion and discordmust end.
I've come here to Cairo to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslimsaround the world, one based on mutual interest and mutual respect, and one based upon thetruth that America and Islam are not exclusive and need not be in competition. Instead, theyoverlap and share common principles -- principles of justice and progress, tolerance and thedignity of all human beings.
I do so recognizing that change cannot happen overnight. I know there's been a lot ofpublicity about this speech, but no single speech can eradicate years of mistrust, nor can Ianswer in the time that I have this afternoon all the complex questions that brought us to thispoint. But I am convinced that in order to move forward, we must say openly to each otherthe things we hold in our hearts and that too often are said only behind closed doors. Theremust be a sustained effort to listen to each other, to learn from each other, to respect oneanother, and to seek common ground. As the Holy Qur’an tells us, "Be conscious of God andspeak always the truth." That is what I will try to do today -- to speak the truth as best I can,humbled by the task before us, and firm in my belief that the interests we share as humanbeings are far more powerful than the forces that drive us apart.
Now part of this conviction is rooted in my own experience. I'm a Christian, but my fathercame from a Kenyan family that includes generations of Muslims.  As a boy, I spent severalyears in Indonesia and heard the call of the azaan at the break of dawn and at the fall ofdusk.  As a young man, I worked in Chicago communities where many found dignity andpeace in their Muslim faith.
As a student of history, I also know civilization's debt to Islam. It was Islam -- at places likeAl-Azhar -- that carried the light of learning through so many centuries, paving the way forEurope's Renaissance and Enlightenment. It was innovation in Muslim communities thatdeveloped the order of algebra, our magnetic compass and tools of navigation, our mastery ofpens and printing, our understanding of how disease spreads and how it can behealed. Islamic culture has given us majestic arches and soaring spires; timeless poetry andcherished music; elegant calligraphy and places of peaceful contemplation. And throughouthistory, Islam has demonstrated through words and deeds the possibilities of religioustolerance and racial equality.
I also know that Islam has always been a part of America's story. The first nation to recognizemy country was Morocco. In signing the Treaty of Tripoli in 1796, our second President, JohnAdams, wrote, "The United States has in itself no character of enmity against the laws,religion, or tranquility of Muslims." And since our founding, American Muslims have enrichedthe United States.

They have fought in our wars; they have served in our government; they have stood for civilrights; they have started businesses; they have taught at our universities; they've excelled inour sports arenas; they've won Nobel Prizes, built our tallest building, and lit the OlympicTorch.  And when the first Muslim American was recently elected to Congress, he took theoath to defend our Constitution using the same Holy Qur’an that one of our Founding Fathers -
- Thomas Jefferson -- kept in his personal library.
So I have known Islam on three continents before coming to the region where it was firstrevealed. That experience guides my conviction that partnership between America and Islammust be based on what Islam is, not what it isn't. And I consider it part of my responsibility asPresident of the United States to fight against negative stereotypes of Islam wherever theyappear.
But, that same principle must apply to Muslim perceptions of America. Just as Muslims do notfit a crude stereotype, America is not the crude stereotype of a self-interested empire. TheUnited States has been one of the greatest sources of progress that the world has everknown. We were born out of revolution against an empire. We were founded upon the idealthat all are created equal. And we have shed blood and struggled for centuries to givemeaning to those words -- within our borders and around the world. We are shaped by everyculture, drawn from every end of the Earth, and dedicated to a simple concept: E pluribusunum -- "Out of many, one."
Now much has been made of the fact that an African American with the name Barack HusseinObama could be elected President. But my personal story is not so unique. The dream ofopportunity for all people has not come true for everyone in America, but its promise existsfor all who come to our shores -- and that includes nearly 7 million American Muslims in ourcountry today who, by the way, enjoy incomes and educational levels that are higher than theAmerican average.
Moreover, freedom in America is indivisible from the freedom to practice one's religion. That iswhy there is a mosque in every state in our union, and over 1200 mosques within ourborders.  That's why the United States government has gone to court to protect the right ofwomen and girls to wear the hijab -- and to punish those who would deny it.
So let there be no doubt: Islam is a part of America. And I believe that America holds withinher the truth that regardless of race, religion, or station in life, all of us share commonaspirations -- to live in peace and security; to get an education and to work with dignity; tolove our families, our communities, and our God. These things we share. This is the hope ofall humanity.
Of course, recognizing our common humanity is only the beginning of our task. Words alonecannot meet the needs of our people. These needs will be met only if we act boldly in theyears ahead, and if we understand that the challenges we face are shared and our failure tomeet them will hurt us all.

For we have learned from recent experience that when a financial system weakens in onecountry, prosperity is hurt everywhere. When a new flu infects one human being, all are atrisk.  When one nation pursues a nuclear weapon, the risk of nuclear attack rises for allnations.  When violent extremists operate in one stretch of mountains, people are endangeredacross an ocean. When innocents in Bosnia and Darfur are slaughtered, that is a stain on ourcollective conscience. That is what it means to share this world in the 21st century. That is theresponsibility we have to one another as human beings.
And this is a difficult responsibility to embrace. For human history has often been a record ofnations and tribes -- and, yes, religions -- subjugating one another in pursuit of their owninterests. Yet in this new age, such attitudes are self-defeating. Given our interdependence,any world order that elevates one nation or group of people over another will inevitablyfail. So whatever we think of the past, we must not be prisoners to it. Our problems must bedealt with through partnership; our progress must be shared. Now, that does not mean weshould ignore sources of tension. Indeed, it suggests the opposite:  We must face thesetensions squarely. And so in that spirit, let me speak as clearly and as plainly as I can aboutsome specific issues that I believe we must finally confront together. 
The first issue that we have to confront is violent extremism in all of its forms.
In Ankara, I made clear that America is not -- and never will be -- at war with Islam. We will,however, relentlessly confront violent extremists who pose a grave threat to our security --because we reject the same thing that people of all faiths reject: the killing of innocent men,women, and children. And it is my first duty as President to protect the American people.
The situation in Afghanistan demonstrates America's goals, and our need to worktogether. Over seven years ago, the United States pursued al Qaeda and the Taliban withbroad international support. We did not go by choice; we went because of necessity. I'maware that there's still some who would question or even justify the events of 9/11. But let usbe clear: Al Qaeda killed nearly 3,000 people on that day. The victims were innocent men,women, and children from America and many other nations who had done nothing to harmanybody. And yet al Qaeda chose to ruthlessly murder these people, claimed credit for theattack, and even now states their determination to kill on a massive scale. They have affiliatesin many countries and are trying to expand their reach. These are not opinions to be debated;these are facts to be dealt with.
Now, make no mistake: We do not want to keep our troops in Afghanistan. We seek nomilitary bases there. It is agonizing for America to lose our young men and women.  It iscostly and politically difficult to continue this conflict. We would gladly bring every single oneof our troops home if we could be confident that there were not violent extremists inAfghanistan and now Pakistan determined to kill as many Americans as they possibly can. Butthat is not yet the case.
  
And that's why we're partnering with a coalition of 46 countries. And despite the costsinvolved, America's commitment will not weaken. Indeed, none of us should tolerate theseextremists.  They have killed in many countries. They have killed people of different faiths.But more than any other, they have killed Muslims. Their actions are irreconcilable with therights of human beings, the progress of nations, and with Islam. The Qur’an teaches thatwhoever kills an innocent, it is as if he has killed all mankind. And the Holy Qur’an also says“Whoever saves a person, it is as if he has saved all mankind.” The enduring faith of over abillion people is so much bigger than the narrow hatred of a few. Islam is not part of theproblem in combating violent extremism -- it is an important part of promoting peace.
Now, we also know that military power alone is not going to solve the problems in Afghanistanand Pakistan. That's why we plan to invest 1.5 billion dollars each year over the next fiveyears to partner with Pakistanis to build schools and hospitals, roads and businesses, andhundreds of millions to help those who've been displaced. That's why we are providing morethan 2.8 billion dollars to help Afghans develop their economy and deliver services that peopledepend on.
Let me also address the issue of Iraq. Unlike Afghanistan, Iraq was a war of choice thatprovoked strong differences in my country and around the world. Although I believe that theIraqi people are ultimately better off without the tyranny of Saddam Hussein, I also believethat events in Iraq have reminded America of the need to use diplomacy and buildinternational consensus to resolve our problems whenever possible. Indeed, we can recall thewords of Thomas Jefferson, who said: "I hope that our wisdom will grow with our power, andteach us that the less we use our power the greater it will be."
Today, America has a dual responsibility: to help Iraq forge a better future; and to leave Iraqto Iraqis. And I have made it clear to the Iraqi people that we pursue no bases, and no claimon their territory or resources. Iraq's sovereignty is its own. And that's why I ordered theremoval of our combat brigades by next August. That is why we will honor our agreement withIraq's democratically elected government to remove combat troops from Iraqi cities by July,and to remove all of our troops from Iraq by 2012. We will help Iraq train its security forcesand develop its economy. But we will support a secure and united Iraq as a partner, and neveras a patron.
And finally, just as America can never tolerate violence by extremists, we must never alter orforget our principles. Nine-eleven was an enormous trauma to our country. The fear andanger that it provoked was understandable, but in some cases it led us to act contrary to ourtraditions and our ideals. We are taking concrete actions to change course. I haveunequivocally prohibited the use of torture by the United States, and I have ordered theprison at Guantanamo Bay closed by early next year. So America will defend itself, respectfulof the sovereignty of nations and the rule of law. And we will do so in partnership with Muslimcommunities which are also threatened. The sooner the extremists are isolated andunwelcome in Muslim communities, the sooner we will all be safer.

The second major source of tension that we need to discuss is the situation between Israelis,Palestinians, and the Arab world.
America's strong bonds with Israel are well known. This bond is unbreakable. It is based uponcultural and historical ties, and the recognition that the aspiration for a Jewish homeland isrooted in a tragic history that cannot be denied.
Around the world, the Jewish people were persecuted for centuries, and anti-Semitism inEurope culminated in an unprecedented Holocaust. Tomorrow, I will visit Buchenwald, whichwas part of a network of camps where Jews were enslaved, tortured, shot, and gassed todeath by the Third Reich. Six million Jews were killed -- more than the entire Jewishpopulation of Israel today. Denying that fact is baseless; it is ignorant; and it ishateful. Threatening Israel with destruction, or repeating vile stereotypes about Jews, isdeeply wrong and only serves to evoke in the minds of Israelis this most painful of memorieswhile preventing the peace that the people of this region deserve.
On the other hand, it is also undeniable that the Palestinian people -- Muslims and Christians -
- has suffered in pursuit of a homeland. For more than 60 years they've endured the pain ofdislocation. Many wait in refugee camps in the West Bank, Gaza, and neighboring lands for alife of peace and security that they have never been able to lead. They endure the dailyhumiliations -- large and small -- that come with occupation. So let there be no doubt: Thesituation for the Palestinian people is intolerable. And America will not turn our backs on thelegitimate Palestinian aspiration for dignity, opportunity, and a state of their own.
For decades then, there has been a stalemate: two peoples with legitimate aspirations, eachwith a painful history that makes compromise elusive. It's easy to point fingers -- forPalestinians to point to the displacement brought about by Israel's founding, and for Israelisto point to the constant hostility and attacks throughout its history from within its borders aswell as beyond. But if we see this conflict only from one side or the other, then we will beblind to the truth: The only resolution is for the aspirations of both sides to be met throughtwo states, where Israelis and Palestinians each live in peace and security.
That is in Israel's interest, Palestine's interest, America's interest, and the world's interest.And that is why I intend to personally pursue this outcome with all the patience and dedicationthat the task requires. The obligations that the parties have agreed to under the road map areclear. For peace to come, it is time for them -- and all of us -- to live up to our responsibilities.
Palestinians must abandon violence. Resistance through violence and killing is wrong and itdoes not succeed. For centuries, black people in America suffered the lash of the whip asslaves and the humiliation of segregation. But it was not violence that won full and equalrights. It was a peaceful and determined insistence upon the ideals at the center of America'sfounding.

This same story can be told by people from South Africa to South Asia; from Eastern Europeto Indonesia. It's a story with a simple truth: Violence is a dead end. It is a sign neither ofcourage nor power to shoot rockets at sleeping children, or to blow up old women on abus. That's not how moral authority is claimed; that's how it is surrendered.
Now is the time for Palestinians to focus on what they can build. The Palestinian Authoritymust develop its capacity to govern, with institutions that serve the needs of its peoples.Hamas does have support among some Palestinians, but they also have to recognize theyhave responsibilities. To play a role in fulfilling Palestinian aspirations, to unify the Palestinianpeople, Hamas must put an end to violence, recognize past agreements, recognize Israel'sright to exist.
At the same time, Israelis must acknowledge that just as Israel's right to exist cannot bedenied, neither can Palestine's. The United States does not accept the legitimacy of continuedIsraeli settlements. This construction violates previous agreements and undermines efforts toachieve peace. It is time for these settlements to stop.
And Israel must also live up to its obligation to ensure that Palestinians can live and work anddevelop their society. Just as it devastates Palestinian families, the continuing humanitariancrisis in Gaza does not serve Israel's security; neither does the continuing lack of opportunityin the West Bank. Progress in the daily lives of the Palestinian people must be a critical part ofa road to peace, and Israel must take concrete steps to enable such progress.
And finally, the Arab states must recognize that the Arab Peace Initiative was an importantbeginning, but not the end of their responsibilities. The Arab-Israeli conflict should no longerbe used to distract the people of Arab nations from other problems. Instead, it must be acause for action to help the Palestinian people develop the institutions that will sustain theirstate, to recognize Israel's legitimacy, and to choose progress over a self-defeating focus onthe past.
America will align our policies with those who pursue peace, and we will say in public what wesay in private to Israelis and Palestinians and Arabs. We cannot impose peace. But privately,many Muslims recognize that Israel will not go away. Likewise, many Israelis recognize theneed for a Palestinian state. It is time for us to act on what everyone knows to be true.
Too many tears have been shed. Too much blood has been shed. All of us have aresponsibility to work for the day when the mothers of Israelis and Palestinians can see theirchildren grow up without fear; when the Holy Land of the three great faiths is the place ofpeace that God intended it to be; when Jerusalem is a secure and lasting home for Jews andChristians and Muslims, and a place for all of the children of Abraham to mingle peacefullytogether as in the story of Isra, when Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed, peace be upon them,joined in prayer.

The third source of tension is our shared interest in the rights and responsibilities of nationson nuclear weapons.
This issue has been a source of tension between the United States and the Islamic Republic ofIran. For many years, Iran has defined itself in part by its opposition to my country, and thereis in fact a tumultuous history between us. In the middle of the Cold War, the United Statesplayed a role in the overthrow of a democratically elected Iranian government. Since theIslamic Revolution, Iran has played a role in acts of hostage-taking and violence against U.S.troops and civilians. This history is well known. Rather than remain trapped in the past, I'vemade it clear to Iran's leaders and people that my country is prepared to move forward. Thequestion now is not what Iran is against, but rather what future it wants to build.
I recognize it will be hard to overcome decades of mistrust, but we will proceed with courage,rectitude, and resolve. There will be many issues to discuss between our two countries, andwe are willing to move forward without preconditions on the basis of mutual respect. But it isclear to all concerned that when it comes to nuclear weapons, we have reached a decisivepoint. This is not simply about America's interests. It's about preventing a nuclear arms racein the Middle East that could lead this region and the world down a hugely dangerous path.
I understand those who protest that some countries have weapons that others do not. Nosingle nation should pick and choose which nation holds nuclear weapons. And that's why Istrongly reaffirmed America's commitment to seek a world in which no nations hold nuclearweapons.  And any nation -- including Iran -- should have the right to access peaceful nuclearpower if it complies with its responsibilities under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Thatcommitment is at the core of the treaty, and it must be kept for all who fully abide by it. And Iam hopeful that all countries in the region can share in this goal.
The fourth issue that I will address is democracy.
I know there has been controversy about the promotion of democracy in recent years, andmuch of this controversy is connected to the war in Iraq. So let me be clear: No system ofgovernment can or should be imposed by one nation by any other.
That does not lessen my commitment, however, to governments that reflect the will of thepeople. Each nation gives life to this principle in its own way, grounded in the traditions of itsown people. America does not presume to know what is best for everyone, just as we wouldnot presume to pick the outcome of a peaceful election. But I do have an unyielding belief thatall people yearn for certain things: the ability to speak your mind and have a say in how youare governed; confidence in the rule of law and the equal administration of justice;government that is transparent and doesn't steal from the people; the freedom to live as youchoose. These are not just American ideas; they are human rights. And that is why we willsupport them everywhere.

Now, there is no straight line to realize this promise. But this much is clear: Governments thatprotect these rights are ultimately more stable, successful, and secure. Suppressing ideasnever succeeds in making them go away. America respects the right of all peaceful and law-
abiding voices to be heard around the world, even if we disagree with them. And we willwelcome all elected, peaceful governments -- provided they govern with respect for all theirpeople.
This last point is important because there are some who advocate for democracy only whenthey're out of power. Once in power, they are ruthless in suppressing the rights of others. Sono matter where it takes hold, government of the people and by the people sets a singlestandard for all who would hold power: You must maintain your power through consent, notcoercion; you must respect the rights of minorities, and participate with a spirit of toleranceand compromise; you must place the interests of your people and the legitimate workings ofthe political process above your party. Without these ingredients, elections alone do not maketrue democracy.
Thank you. The fifth issue that we must address together is religious freedom.
Islam has a proud tradition of tolerance. We see it in the history of Andalusia and Cordobaduring the Inquisition. I saw it firsthand as a child in Indonesia, where devout Christiansworshiped freely in an overwhelmingly Muslim country. That is the spirit we need today.People in every country should be free to choose and live their faith based upon thepersuasion of the mind and the heart and the soul. This tolerance is essential for religion tothrive, but it's being challenged in many different ways.
Among some Muslims, there's a disturbing tendency to measure one's own faith by therejection of somebody else's faith. The richness of religious diversity must be upheld --whether it is for Maronites in Lebanon or the Copts in Egypt. And if we are being honest, faultlines must be closed among Muslims, as well, as the divisions between Sunni and Shia haveled to tragic violence, particularly in Iraq.
Freedom of religion is central to the ability of peoples to live together. We must alwaysexamine the ways in which we protect it. For instance, in the United States, rules oncharitable giving have made it harder for Muslims to fulfill their religious obligation. That's whyI'm committed to working with American Muslims to ensure that they can fulfill zakat.Likewise, it is important for Western countries to avoid impeding Muslim citizens frompracticing religion as they see fit -- for instance, by dictating what clothes a Muslim womanshould wear. 
We can't disguise hostility towards any religion behind the pretence of liberalism.

In fact, faith should bring us together. And that's why we're forging service projects inAmerica to bring together Christians, Muslims, and Jews. That's why we welcome efforts likeSaudi Arabian King Abdullah's interfaith dialogue and Turkey's leadership in the Alliance ofCivilizations. Around the world, we can turn dialogue into interfaith service, so bridgesbetween peoples lead to action -- whether it is combating malaria in Africa, or providing reliefafter a natural disaster. 
The sixth issue that I want to address is women's rights.
I know, and you can tell from this audience, that there is a healthy debate about this issue. Ireject the view of some in the West that a woman who chooses to cover her hair is somehowless equal, but I do believe that a woman who is denied an education is denied equality. And itis no coincidence that countries where women are well educated are far more likely to beprosperous. Now, let me be clear: Issues of women's equality are by no means simply anissue for Islam. In Turkey, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia, we've seen Muslim-majoritycountries elect a woman to lead. Meanwhile, the struggle for women's equality continues inmany aspects of American life, and in countries around the world.
I am convinced that our daughters can contribute just as much to society as our sons. Ourcommon prosperity will be advanced by allowing all humanity -- men and women -- to reachtheir full potential. I do not believe that women must make the same choices as men in orderto be equal, and I respect those women who choose to live their lives in traditional roles. Butit should be their choice. And that is why the United States will partner with any Muslim-
majority country to support expanded literacy for girls, and to help young women pursueemployment through micro-financing that helps people live their dreams.
Finally, I want to discuss economic development and opportunity.
I know that for many, the face of globalization is contradictory. The Internet and televisioncan bring knowledge and information, but also offensive sexuality and mindless violence intothe home. Trade can bring new wealth and opportunities, but also huge disruptions andchange in communities. In all nations -- including America -- this change can bring fear; fearthat because of modernity we lose control over our economic choices, our politics, and mostimportantly our identities -- those things we most cherish about our communities, ourfamilies, our traditions, and our faith.
But I also know that human progress cannot be denied. There need not be contradictionsbetween development and tradition. Countries like Japan and South Korea grew theireconomies enormously while maintaining distinct cultures. The same is true for theastonishing progress within Muslim-majority countries from Kuala Lumpur to Dubai. In ancienttimes and in our times, Muslim communities have been at the forefront of innovation andeducation.

And this is important because no development strategy can be based only upon what comesout of the ground, nor can it be sustained while young people are out of work. Many Gulfstates have enjoyed great wealth as a consequence of oil, and some are beginning to focus iton broader development. But all of us must recognize that education and innovation will bethe currency of the 21st century, and in too many Muslim communities there remainsunderinvestment in these areas. I'm emphasizing such investment within my owncountry. And while America in the past has focused on oil and gas when it comes to this partof the world, we now seek a broader engagement.
On education, we will expand exchange programs, and increase scholarships, like the one thatbrought my father to America. At the same time, we will encourage more Americans to studyin Muslim communities. And we will match promising Muslim students with internships inAmerica, invest in online learning for teachers and children around the world, and create anew online network, so a young person in Kansas can communicate instantly with a youngperson in Cairo.
On economic development, we will create a new corps of business volunteers to partner withcounterparts in Muslim-majority countries. And I will host a summit on entrepreneurship thisyear to identify how we can deepen ties between business leaders, foundations, and socialentrepreneurs in the United States and Muslim communities around the world.
On science and technology, we will launch a new fund to support technological development inMuslim-majority countries, and to help transfer ideas to the marketplace so they can createmore jobs. We'll open centers of scientific excellence in Africa, the Middle East and SoutheastAsia, and appoint new science envoys to collaborate on programs that develop new sources ofenergy, create green jobs, digitize records, clean water, grow new crops. Today I'mannouncing a new global effort with the Organization of the Islamic Conference to eradicatepolio. And we will also expand partnerships with Muslim communities to promote child andmaternal health.
All these things must be done in partnership. Americans are ready to join with citizens andgovernments; community organizations, religious leaders, and businesses in Muslimcommunities around the world to help our people pursue a better life.
Now the issues that I have described will not be easy to address. But we have a responsibilityto join together on behalf of the world that we seek -- a world where extremists no longerthreaten our people, and American troops have come home; a world where Israelis andPalestinians are each secure in a state of their own, and nuclear energy is used for peacefulpurposes; a world where governments serve their citizens, and the rights of all God's childrenare respected. Those are mutual interests. That is the world we seek. But we can only achieveit together.

I know there are many, Muslim and non-Muslim, who question whether we can forge this newbeginning. Some are eager to stoke the flames of division, and to stand in the way ofprogress.  Some suggest that it isn't worth the effort -- that we are fated to disagree, andcivilizations are doomed to clash. Many more are simply skeptical that real change canoccur. There's so much fear, so much mistrust that has built up over the years. But if wechoose to be bound by the past, we will never move forward.
And I want to particularly say this to young people of every faith, in every country: You, morethan anyone, have the ability to reimagine the world, to remake this world. All of us share thisworld for but a brief moment in time. The question is whether we spend that time focused onwhat pushes us apart, or whether we commit ourselves to an effort -- a sustained effort -- tofind common ground, to focus on the future we seek for our children, and to respect thedignity of all human beings.
It's easier to start wars than to end them. It's easier to blame others than to look inward. It'seasier to see what is different about someone than to find the things we share. But we shouldchoose the right path, not just the easy path. There's one rule that lies at the heart of everyreligion -- that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us. This truth transcendsnations and peoples -- a belief that isn't new; that isn't black or white or brown; that isn'tChristian or Muslim or Jew. It's a belief that pulsed in the cradle of civilization, and that stillbeats in the hearts of billions around the world. It's a faith in other people, and it's whatbrought me here today.
We have the power to make the world we seek, but only if we have the courage to make anew beginning, keeping in mind what has been written.
The Holy Qur’an tells us: "O mankind! We have created you male and a female; and we havemade you into nations and tribes so that you may know one another."
The Talmud tells us: "The whole of the Torah is for the purpose of promoting peace."
The Holy Bible tells us: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God." 
The people of the world can live together in peace. We know that is God's vision. Now thatmust be our work here on Earth.
Thank you. And may God's peace be upon you. Thank you very much. Thank you.