Let’s give it up for Buzz and the Georgia Tech Band for getting us fired up.  Also give it up forGovernor Nathan Deal, who is here.  Congressmen Hank Johnson and David Scott.  AtlantaMayor Kasim Reed.  And the President of this great institution, Georgia Tech, Bud Peterson. That’s good.  You’ve got a high approval rating.  You do.  Absolutely. 
We also have a special guest with us -- this is a proud Georgia Tech alum, who just happensalso to be the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Sandy Winnefeld is here. Where’s Sandy?  There he is.  Before he was the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, hewas a Navy fighter pilot, which is cooler.  Now he just goes to meetings.  What’s up withthat?  I told him he’s got to get back on a plane. 
It is great to be at one of the finest technical institutes in the world.   One of the finest in theworld.  I mean, you’ve got to be if the Ramblin’ Wreck is still running after all these years. That’s a Georgia Tech reference that some of you may not know.  I also know that GeorgiaTech is terrific because we’ve actually worked with you on several fronts -– from promotingadvanced manufacturing to unlocking the mysteries of the brain to helping more studentsbecome entrepreneurs.
  
And the reason I wanted to come here today is because I believe that higher education, asyou believe, is one of the best investments that anybody can make in their future.  And it’salso one of the best investments you can make in our country’s future.  So I’m here to saythank you and to tell you I’m proud of you, because I know that it’s not always easy to dowhat you’re doing.  It takes perseverance.  A lot of late nights in the library and the lab, andyou’re wrapping your minds around complex formulas and concepts that, frankly, I don’tunderstand.  But I know they’re complex.  And some of you are holding jobs down at thesame time, which makes it even harder. 
But as frustrating as it may be, and Tiffany expressed some frustrations on occasion, it isworth it.  Higher education has never been more important.  And the message I want todeliver today, not just to you but to the entire country, is the entire nation has to treat it as apriority.
Right now, our economy is growing steadily.  It's creating new jobs.  You’re going to be goinginto a job market that’s much better than the one that existed when I came into office sixyears ago.  After the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes, over the past five years, ourbusinesses have now created 12 million new jobs.  Unemployment continues to come down,and obviously that’s good news for those of you who are graduating soon.  Yes, that’s right,you want a job.  Your parents also want you to have a job.  They don’t want you on thecouch.
But I didn’t run for President just to get us back to where we were -– I ran for President to getus to where we need to go.  And where we need to go is a growing middle class with risingincomes and opportunities for everybody who’s willing to work hard.  An America where nomatter who you are, what you look like, where you came from, how you started, who youlove, what faith you’re a part of, you can make it in this country if you try.  That’s whatAmerica is all about.
And today, a college degree is the surest ticket to the middle class and beyond.  It’s the keyto getting a good job that pays a good income.  And it offers a measure of security, because acollege degree tells employers that you don’t just have one set of skills; that you’ve got thecontinuous capacity to learn new skills, which is going to be particularly important for yourgeneration because the economy is going to churn and change in ways that none of us caneven anticipate.
Before we came out here, I was talking to a group, including Sandy Winnefeld, and yourMayor Kasim Reed, Tyler Perry buddies -- he wasn’t in Madea, he was Tyler.  And we weretalking about how rapidly the technology is transforming everything we understand,everything we know --everything from drones, to artificial intelligence, to driver-less cars. And we don’t yet know how all that is going to shape the nation that you inherit, but we knowit's going to shape it dramatically.  And in order for you to be able to be successful, you’regoing to have to adapt, continuously.  The days where you work at one place for 30, 40 years,those days are over.
  
And so the skillsets you are getting now are going to keep you in that job market.  You’regoing to have multiple jobs before you’re 30.  Some of you will have multiple careers.  And welive in a 21st-century economy, where your most valuable asset is your imagination, yourknowledge, your ability to analyze tough problems.  And that’s not just true for individualAmericans, it’s true for our whole country.
The ability to compete in the global economy depends on us having the world’s most skilled,best-educated workforce.  And by the way, let me just add, it’s also going to be critical for usto maintain our democracy in a complex, diverse society.
Understandably, when I come to college campuses, there’s a lot of just bread and butter, nutsand bolts, how does this translate into jobs, careers.  But part of what has made America theexceptional nation that it is, is our diversity and our ability to draw from every corner of theworld -- all the talent, all the ideas -- and create this amazing stew.  And the more complexthis society, the tougher that becomes.
And so to have all of you possess the ability to listen and to learn from people who aren’t likeyou -- that’s also what you’re learning here, and that’s going to make you more effective toevery employer out there.  But it’s also -- it’s going to make you better citizens, and it’s goingto make our democracy function better. 
But back to the jobs thing.  Jobs and businesses will go wherever the best workers are.  And Idon’t want them to have to look any further than the United States of America.  I wantbusinesses investing here.  I want Americans getting those new jobs.  That’s how we’re goingto lead the world in this century just like we did in the 20th century.
So here’s the challenge:  Higher education has never been more important, but it’s also neverbeen more expensive.  The average undergrad who borrows money to pay for collegegraduates with about $28,000 in student loan debt.  That’s just the average; some studentsend up with a lot more than that -- you know who you are.  I’m not telling you anything youdon’t know. 
And let me say that it’s been established time and time again that Georgia Tech is one of thebest bargains around.  You are getting a great education for a great value.  Which is one ofthe reasons I’m here; obviously, I wouldn’t go to a place that was a bad bargain and reallyexpensive and no value.  That would not make sense.
But even here at Georgia Tech, even with the great value it is, it’s expensive.  And I’m here totell you, I’m with you.  I believe that America is not a place where higher education is aprivilege that is reserved for the few.  America needs to be a place where higher educationhas to be available for every single person who’s willing to strive for it -- who’s willing to workfor it.
  
And I’ve said this before:  I take this personally.  My grandfather had a chance to go tocollege because this country decided that when veterans returned home from World War II,they should be able to go to college.  And this government stepped up.
My mother was able to raise two kids by herself, in part because she got grants that helpedpay for her education.  And I am only standing here -– and Michelle is only where she is today–- because of scholarships and student loans and work study.  We did not come from familiesof means.  We didn't come from families of means, but we knew that if we worked hard, therewas help out there to make sure we got a great education.  That’s what this country gave tous.
And that’s why this has been such a priority for me.  I take it personally because when I lookout at all of you, I see myself.  And I remember the fact that it took me 10 years to pay off allour student loans.  We were paying more for our student loans than our mortgage, even afterMalia and Sasha were born.  We were supposed to be saving for their college education; wewere still paying off ours.
And that's why we’ve acted again and again to make college more affordable.  Five years agothis month, we enacted the largest reforms to the student loan program in history.  We cutout the big banks that were taking taxpayer dollars and serving as middlemen in the studentloan game, and we said, well, let’s just give the money directly to the students like you.
So as a result of that change, we saved billions of dollars.  We were to expand tax credits andPell grants, and put college within reach for millions more middle-class and low-incomestudents across the country.  Then we fought to keep interest rates on student rates --interest rates on student loans low and capped how high those rates can rise.  And as a result,the typical undergrad is saving about $1,500.  We also acted to let millions of graduates captheir loan payments at 10 percent of their incomes, so they don’t have to choose betweenpaying the rent and paying back their debt.
And by the way, everybody here, if you don't already know about the Income-BasedRepayment Program, you need to learn about it because it’s still under-utilized.  But it givesyou an opportunity to make sure that if you make a career choice that doesn't make tons ofmoney, you're still able to do the responsible thing and pay back your loans at a pace thatalso allows you to build a family and buy a home and live your lives.
And graduates who go into lower-paying fields like social work or teaching, they're not goingto pay a price for following their dreams because they're going to have even better options interms of how they repay their loans.  So that's what we did on the student loan side. 
Meanwhile, we’re working to hold down the cost of a college education.  So we’re partneringwith schools like Georgia Tech on innovative ways to increase value -– like your onlinemaster’s program in computer science -- which costs just a fraction of the price of an in-
classroom program. 
  
And I sent Congress a bold new plan to bring down the cost of community college to zero. Because not everybody may be prepared right away to start a four-year university.  But also,in some cases, even if they could, they may choose to get two years of college free, and thenbe able to transfer the credits for their four-year education.  We want to make communitycollege, at minimum, just as free and universal as high school is today.  That should be ournew baseline.  We want to get out ahead of the curve in terms of where we need to go.
Earlier today, I took a new action to make it easier for students to pay for college and pay offtheir loans.  We’re creating a way for you to ask questions about your loans, file a complaint,cut through the bureaucracy, get a faster response.  That’s not just from the government,that’s also from the contractors who sometimes service your loans.  We’re going to requirethat the businesses that service your loans provide clear information about how much youowe, what your options are for repaying it, and if you’re falling behind, help you get back ingood standing with reasonable fees on a reasonable timeline.  And if you’re paying stuff off,you should be paying off the high-interest loans first, not the low-interest ones.  We’re goingto take a hard look at whether we need new laws to strengthen protections for all borrowers,wherever you get your loans from.
So we’re trying to tackle this problem from every angle.  There’s no silver bullet.  But we’retrying to make sure that across the board, more and more young people can afford to go tocollege, and then afterwards, aren’t so burdened with debt that you can’t do anything else. We want to make this experience more affordable because you’re not just investing inyourselves, you’re investing in your nation.
But here’s the thing:  We’ve got more to do, all of us -- universities, students, parents,financial institutions and, yes, the government, to make sure that you’re not saddled withdebt before you even get started in life.  That’s something that’s in all of our interests. 
Now, my friends, the Republicans in Congress, are planning to unveil their budget soon.  I’mhoping they have something to offer that will help hardworking young people.  So far, theeducation bill that they put forward a couple weeks ago is not a good template, it’s not a goodstart.  I’m hoping it will improve because right now, the way it’s structured, it would let statesand cities shuffle education dollars into things like sports stadiums or tax cuts for the wealthyinstead of schools.  And it would allow states to make even deeper cuts into school districtsthat need the most support, send even more money to the most well-off school districts. We’d invest less per child by the end of the decade than we do now.  So it’s the wrongapproach.  We’ve got to be working to make sure every child gets a quality education, everystudent can afford college.
And so we’re going to be reaching out to them, trying to get them to see this is a goodinvestment in our economy, it’s a good investment in our national security.  The way that youkeep America safe, one of the best, most important ways is to make sure we’ve got a strongeconomy with a strong workforce.  And all of us have a role to play in making that happen. 
  
So in order to spur more of a conversation to get more folks engaged, we’re going to trysomething new to help do this.  It’s not a fancy new program.  It’s not -- it doesn’t have acomplicated acronym.  It doesn’t involve new spending or bureaucracy.  It’s just a simpleorganizing principle that I want all of us to sign onto, a declaration of values –- what I’mcalling a Student Aid Bill of Rights. 
And it says every student deserves access to a quality, affordable education.  Every studentshould be able to access the resources to pay for college.  Every borrower has the right to anaffordable repayment plan.  Every borrower has the right to quality customer service, reliableinformation, and fair treatment, even if they struggle to repay their loans. 
It’s a simple set of principles that if everybody signed onto -- Republicans, Democrats, statelegislators, university presidents, members of Congress -- it can focus our attention, all thesedifferent things that we’re doing, into one simple, basic idea, which is, make sure that whenyou’re doing the right thing, that your society has got your back and is looking out for you.
So based on this principle, we’re going to make sure universities are using technology to helpstudents learn at lower costs.  We’re going to make sure that loan servicers can find betterways to help borrowers keep up with monthly payments that they can afford.  We as acountry can do more to invest in Pell grants and community college to make sure qualityeducation is affordable for everybody. 
So we’re going to just keep on moving on every front.  And we want everybody who agreeswith these principles to sit down and work with us, and figure out how they can make thesestudent rights real.  And you’ve got a part to play as well. 
We had the great honor of being at Selma this past weekend for the 50th anniversary of theMarch from Selma.  And one of the main points I think that all of us made was change doesn’thappen by itself; it happens because people get organized and mobilized and focused, andthey push, and sometimes they disrupt and they make folks uncomfortable, and they askquestions about why is it this way instead of that way. 
And I want us to think about access to higher education and affordability of higher educationin that same way.  I want us to all organize together -- not on a partisan basis, it’s notorganizing around an election, it’s organizing around a simple idea that everybody should beable to get behind. 
And you’re going to have to play the part.  Because what we also made the point of this pastweekend is young people typically lead the pack with new ideas, with new initiatives, with newfocus, with a new vision.
So if you agree with the basic values that I outlined, if you believe in a Student Aid Bill ofRights that will help more Americans pay for a quality education, then sign your name to thisdeclaration. 
  
You can go to a website, because you guys like tech stuff. You go to:WhiteHouse.gov/CollegeOpportunity -- WhiteHouse.gov/CollegeOpportunity.  Tell your familiesand classmates and professors to do it.  I’m going to ask members of Congress, and lenders,and as many business leaders as I can find to sign up.
We’re going to mobilize a coalition around this country to get this process moving, becausethere are a lot of good ideas right now but they’re stalled, or they’re happening piecemeal, orthey’re happening in one university, or they’re happening in one state, and they have tohappen everywhere.  And we’ve got to mobilize the entire nation to make that happen.  Andit's going to start with students themselves, because if you aren’t asking for somethingdifferent, if you aren’t asking for help, if you’re not getting mobilized, then folks aren’t goingto help you, and then you’ll just be complaining -- especially once you graduate and you starthaving to write those checks.
So don’t stop engaging in this issue, even after you graduate, because you’ll be still impactedby it.  And in the meantime, you’ve got to study hard, and work hard, and have fun.  Makesome new discoveries.  Inspire us.  Lead us.  Be the Americans that we need you to be. 
Every American should have the right to go as far as their talents and hard work will takethem.  That is what college is all about.  That is what America is all about.  And you embodythat basic notion.  You are that talent.  You are an embodiment of what we hope for:  Acountry that says that everybody, rich, poor, black, white, Hispanic, Asian, gay, straight, man,woman, with disabilities, without -- no matter who you are or where you come from, not onlycan you succeed but you can help everybody else succeed.  That’s the promise that helped usbecome the greatest nation in the world.  That’s the promise that I need you working for. 
Thank you, everybody.  God bless you.  Thank you, Georgia.
