Hello, Newport News!  Well, it is good to see all of you here today. 
I want to thank your CEO, Mike Petters, for showing me around.  I usually don’t get a chanceto hang out with nuclear submarines, especially submarines that my wife has sponsored.  Soright there, that was worth the trip. 
But most importantly, it’s a great chance to see the incredible men and women who, everysingle day, are helping to keep America safe and are just the bedrock of this country’smanufacturing base.  Thank you to all of you.
I want to thank our outstanding Secretary of the Navy, Ray Mabus, who’s here.  There he isright there -- the good-looking guy over at the end.  I want to thank your Mayor, McKinleyPrice, who served this nation bravely in the U.S. Army.  I want to thank two outstandingCongressmen who care about this facility, care about Virginia and care about the country --Congressman Bobby Scott is here -- and Congressman Scott Rigell is here as well.
Now, the reason I came here today, in addition to seeing just some incredible stuff -- it’s true,every time I come to these places, I don't know how you all do it.  It is just amazing work. 
  
But the main reason I'm here is to call attention to the important work that you’re doing onbehalf of the nation’s defense, and to let the American people know that this work, along withhundreds of thousands of jobs, are currently in jeopardy because of politics in Washington. 
In a few days, Congress might allow a series of immediate, painful, arbitrary budget cuts totake place -- known in Washington as the sequester.  Now, that's a pretty bad name --sequester.  But the effects are even worse than the name.  Instead of cutting out thegovernment spending we don’t need -- wasteful programs that don't work, special interest taxloopholes and tax breaks -- what the sequester does is it uses a meat cleaver approach to gutcritical investments in things like education and national security and lifesaving medicalresearch. 
And the impact of this policy won’t be felt overnight, but it will be real.  The sequester willweaken America’s economic recovery.  It will weaken our military readiness.  And it willweaken the basic services that the American people depend on every single day. 
Already, the uncertainty around these cuts is having an effect.  Companies are starting toprepare for layoff notices.  Families are preparing to cut back on expenses.  And the longerthese cuts are in place, the greater the damage.
So here at Newport News Shipbuilding, you guys have made an enormous investment,because we've said in order to maintain the finest Navy that the world has ever known we'vegot to make sure that there is an orderly process whereby we are continually upgrading ourships, building new ships, maintaining our ships properly.  And these are some big ships.  Soit’s expensive, and it’s complicated.  And you’ve got 5,000 suppliers all across the country,and you've got to have some certainty and some knowledge about how things are going toproceed over the long term for Mike and others to plan properly. So you're rightly concerned.  Mike is properly concerned about the impact that these cuts willhave on not just this company, but companies and small businesses from all 50 states thatsupply you with parts and equipment. 
Mike was telling me that you guys have already made a billion dollars’ worth of capitalinvestment.  You've got half a billion dollars in training costs as you recruit and hire newpeople.  Well, those aren't commitments that you make lightly.  You've got to have thecapacity to plan and have some certainty in terms of what it is that we're going to be doing. And you know that if Congress can’t get together and plan our nation’s finances for the longterm, that over time some of your jobs and businesses could be at risk. 
Over at the Norfolk Naval Station, the threat of these cuts has already forced the Navy tocancel the deployment, or delay the repair of certain aircraft carriers.  One that’s currentlybeing built might not get finished.  Another carrier might not get started at all.  And that hurtsyour bottom line.  That hurts this community. 
  
Because of these automatic cuts, about 90,000 Virginians who work for the Department ofDefense would be forced to take unpaid leave from their jobs.  So that’s money out of theirpockets, money out of their paychecks.  And then that means there’s going to be a rippleeffect on thousands of other jobs and businesses and services throughout the Commonwealth,because if they don’t have money in their pockets or less money in their pockets, that meansthey're less able to afford to buy goods and services from other businesses.  So it's not justrestricted to the defense industry.  
All told, the sequester could cost tens of thousands of jobs right here in Virginia.  But itdoesn’t just stop there.  If the sequester goes into effect, more than 2,000 college studentswould lose their financial aid.  Early education like Head Start and Early Start would beeliminated for nearly 1,000 children, and around 18,000 fewer Virginians would get the skillsand training they need to find a job.   
Across the country, these cuts will force federal prosecutors to close cases and potentially letcriminals go.  Air traffic controllers and airport security will see cutbacks, and that could causedelays at airports across the country.  Tens of thousands of parents will have to scramble tofind child care for their kids.  Hundreds of thousands of Americans will lose access to primarycare and preventive care like flu vaccinations and cancer screenings, including more than3,500 children right here in Virginia. 
So these cuts are wrong.  They’re not smart.  They’re not fair.  They’re a self-inflicted woundthat doesn’t have to happen.
Now, the reason that we're even thinking about the sequester is because people are rightlyconcerned about the deficit and the debt.  But there is a sensible way of doing things andthere is a dumb way of doing things.  I mean, think about your own family.  Let's say thatsuddenly you've got a little less money coming in. Are you going to say, well, we'll cut outcollege tuition for the kid, we'll stop feeding the little guy over here, we won't pay our car noteeven though that means we can't get to work -- that’s not what you do, right? 
You step back and you say, what is it that's important -- our child's education, making surethey're healthy, making sure we can get to the job, keeping our house repaired?  And thenyou say, here are the things that aren't so important and you cut those out.  You prioritize,and you make smart decisions.  Well, we should be doing the same thing.   
Now, I’ve laid out a plan that details how we can pay down our deficit in a way that’s balancedand responsible.  We have the plan right on a website, the White House website.  Everybodycan go see it.  It details exactly how we can cut programs that don't work, how we can raisemoney by closing loopholes that are only serving a few, as opposed to the average American. 
We detailed $930 billion in sensible spending cuts that we’re willing to make and $580 billionin wasteful tax loopholes and deductions that we’re willing to eliminate through tax reform. 
  
And what I've said is if the Republicans in Congress don’t like every detail of my proposal,which I don't expect them to, I’ve told them my door is open.  I am more than willing tonegotiate.  I want to compromise.  There's no reason why we can't come together and find asensible way to reduce the deficit over the long term without affecting vital services, withouthurting families, without impacting outstanding facilities like this one and our nationaldefense.  There's a way of doing this. 
And the fact is there are leaders in both parties throughout this country who want to do thesame.  I've got to give Scott Rigell credit.  He is one of your Republican congressmen who’swith us here today -- and that's not always healthy for a Republican, being with me.  But thereason he’s doing it is because he knows it's important to you.  And he’s asked his colleaguesin the House to consider closing tax loopholes instead of letting these automatic cuts gothrough.  He’s concerned about the deficit, and he’s more than prepared to make some reallytough cuts, but he wants to do it in a smart way. 
Bobby Scott -- same thing.  Some of the cuts we've proposed, Bobby might not think areperfect, but he knows that we've got to make some tough decisions.  He just wants to makesure that you aren't the ones who are adversely impacted and that we're sharing the sacrificein bringing down our deficit; we're not just dumping it on a few people and we're not doing itin a dumb way.
Senators like John McCain have made similar statements to what Scott said.  Your RepublicanGovernor along with other governors around the country have said they want Congress tostop the sequester, to stop these cuts.  
But I just have to be honest with you.  There are too many Republicans in Congress right nowwho refuse to compromise even an inch when it comes to closing tax loopholes and specialinterest tax breaks.  And that's what's holding things up right now. 
Keep in mind, nobody is asking them to raise income tax rates.  All we’re asking is to considerclosing tax loopholes and deductions that the Speaker of the House, John Boehner, said hewas willing to do just a few months ago.  He said there were a bunch of loopholes anddeductions you could close.  He said you could raise $800 billion, a trillion dollars by closingloopholes. 
Well, we're not even asking for that much.  All we're asking is that they close loopholes for thewell-off and the well-connected -- for hedge fund managers, or oil companies, or corporate jetowners who are all doing very well and don’t need these tax loopholes -- so we can avoidlaying off workers, or kicking kids off Head Start, or reducing financial aid for collegestudents. 
I don’t think that’s too much to ask.  I do not think that is partisan.  The majority of theAmerican people agree with me.  The majority of Newport News agrees with me.  We need toget this done.
  
But the choice is up to Congress.  Only Congress has the power to pass a law that stops thesedamaging cuts and replaces them with smart savings and tax reform.  And the second I getthat bill on my desk, I will sign it into law.  But I've got to get Congress to pass it. 
None of us will get 100 percent of what we want.  Democrats, they've got to make sometough choices too. Democrats like me, we've said we're prepared to make some tough cutsand reforms, including to programs like Medicare.  But if we're willing to compromise, thenRepublicans in the House have to compromise as well.  That’s what democracy is about. That’s what this country needs right now.
So let me just make one last point, by the way, for those of you who are following this.  Now,lately, some people have been saying, well, maybe we'll just give the President someflexibility.  He could make the cuts the way he wants and that way it won't be as damaging. The problem is when you're cutting $85 billion in seven months, which represents over a 10-
percent cut in the defense budget in seven months, there's no smart way to do that.  There'sno smart way to do that.  You don't want to have to choose between, let's see, do I closefunding for the disabled kid, or the poor kid?  Do I close this Navy shipyard or some otherone?  When you're doing things in a way that's not smart, you can't gloss over the pain andthe impact it's going to have on the economy.  
And the broader point is, Virginia, we can’t just cut our way to prosperity.  We can’t just cutour way to prosperity.  We can't ask seniors and working families like yours to shoulder theentire burden of deficit reduction while asking nothing more from the wealthiest and the mostpowerful.  We're not going to grow the middle class just by shifting the cost of health care orcollege onto families that are already struggling, or forcing communities to lay off moreteachers or cops or firefighters or shipbuilders, and then folks who are doing really well don’thave to do anything more.  That’s not fair, and it's not good for the economy. 
And the other thing we've got to do is to stop having these crises manufactured every month. It seems like -- I know you guys must get tired of it.  Didn’t we just solve this thing?  Nowwe've got another thing coming up?  I mean, think about if Mike Petters ran his business thisway -- once every month or two there would be some crisis, and you wouldn’t be surewhether or not you were working or not.  Even if it got solved eventually or ultimately, itwould be pretty discouraging on people.  You would be less productive.  Ships wouldn’t getbuilt as fast.  You would waste money because you don’t know exactly what to expect.  Folksaren't sure, am I showing up to work today, or not? 
If it's not a good way to run a business, it's sure not a good way to run a country.
Now, all of you, the American people, you’ve worked too hard for too long rebuilding anddigging our way out of the financial crisis back in 2007 and 2008 just to see Congress causeanother one.  The greatest nation on Earth can't keep on conducting its business drifting fromone crisis to the next. 
  
We've got to have a plan.  We've got to invest in our common future.  Our true north is agrowing economy that creates good middle-class jobs; a country that provides its people withthe skills they need to get those jobs and make sure that you're getting paid a decent wagefor working hard so you can support your families.  That’s what we should be focused on rightnow.  Not weakening the economy.  Not laying people off.
That’s what we should be talking about in Washington.  And if you agree with me, I need youto make sure your voices are heard.  Let your leaders know what you expect of them.  Letthem know what you believe.  Let them know that what this country was built on was a senseof obligation to not just each other but to future generations; that we've got to shoulder thoseobligations as one nation, and as one people. 
I was in a conversation with some of the governors from across the country yesterday and Itold them, I said, I've run my last election.  Michelle is very happy about that.  I'm notinterested in spin; I'm not interested in playing a blame game.  At this point, all I'm interestedin is just solving problems.  All I'm interested in is making sure that when you get up early inthe morning, and get to this ship at 5:30 in the morning, that you know if you do a good joband if you work hard and if you're making sure that all the parts to this incredible ship thatyou're building are where they need to be -- if you're doing what you do, then you can gohome feeling satisfied, I did my job, I did my part, I can support my family, I can take pride inwhat I've done for this country. 
That’s all I want.  I want us to be able to look back five years from now, 10 years from now,and say we took care of our business and we put an end to some of these games that maybe,I guess, are entertaining for some but are hurting too many people. 
But in order for us to make that happen I'm going to need you.  The one thing about beingPresident is, after four years you get pretty humble.  You’d think maybe you wouldn't, butactually you become more humble.  You realize what you don't know.  You realize all themistakes you’ve made.  But you also realize you can't do things by yourself.  That's not howour system works.  You’ve got to have the help and the goodwill of Congress, and what thatmeans is you’ve got to make sure that constituents of members of Congress are putting somepressure on them, making sure they’re doing the right thing, putting an end to some of thesepolitical games.
So I need you, Virginia, to keep up the pressure.  I need you to keep up the effort.  I needyou to keep up the fight.  If you do, Congress will listen.  If you stand up and speak out,Congress will listen.  And together, we will unleash our true potential, and we'll remind theworld just why it is the United States builds the greatest ships on Earth and is the greatestnation on Earth.
Thank you.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.
