Good morning, everybody. Please have a seat.
A week ago today, I sent Congress the American Jobs Act.  It’s a plan that will lead to newjobs for teachers, for construction workers, for veterans, and for the unemployed.  It will cuttaxes for every small business owner and virtually every working man and woman inAmerica.  And the proposals in this jobs bill are the kinds that have been supported byDemocrats and Republicans in the past.  So there shouldn’t be any reason for Congress todrag its feet.  They should pass it right away.  I'm ready to sign a bill.  I've got the pens allready.
Now, as I said before, Congress should pass this bill knowing that every proposal is fully paidfor.  The American Jobs Act will not add to our nation’s debt.  And today, I’m releasing a planthat details how to pay for the jobs bill while also paying down our debt over time. 
And this is important, because the health of our economy depends in part on what we do rightnow to create the conditions where businesses can hire and middle-class families can feel abasic measure of economic security.  But in the long run, our prosperity also depends on ourability to pay down the massive debt we’ve accumulated over the past decade in a way thatallows us to meet our responsibilities to each other and to the future.
During this past decade, profligate spending in Washington, tax cuts for multi-millionaires andbillionaires, the cost of two wars, and the recession turned a record surplus into a yawningdeficit, and that left us with a big pile of IOUs.  If we don’t act, that burden will ultimately fallon our children’s shoulders.  If we don’t act, the growing debt will eventually crowd outeverything else, preventing us from investing in things like education, or sustaining programslike Medicare. 
  
So Washington has to live within its means.  The government has to do what families acrossthis country have been doing for years.  We have to cut what we can’t afford to pay for whatreally matters.  We need to invest in what will promote hiring and economic growth now whilestill providing the confidence that will come with a plan that reduces our deficits over the long-
term. These principles were at the heart of the deficit framework that I put forward in April.  It wasan approach to shrink the deficit as a share of the economy, but not to do so so abruptly withspending cuts that would hamper growth or prevent us from helping small businesses andmiddle-class families get back on their feet.
It was an approach that said we need to go through the budget line-by-line looking for waste,without shortchanging education and basic scientific research and road construction, becausethose things are essential to our future.  And it was an approach that said we shouldn'tbalance the budget on the backs of the poor and the middle class; that for us to solve thisproblem, everybody, including the wealthiest Americans and biggest corporations, have to paytheir fair share. 
Now, during the debt ceiling debate, I had hoped to negotiate a compromise with the Speakerof the House that fulfilled these principles and achieved the $4 trillion in deficit reduction thatleaders in both parties have agreed we need -- a grand bargain that would have strengthenedour economy, instead of weakened it.  Unfortunately, the Speaker walked away from abalanced package.  What we agreed to instead wasn’t all that grand.  But it was a start --roughly $1 trillion in cuts to domestic spending and defense spending.
Everyone knows we have to do more, and a special joint committee of Congress is assigned tofind more deficit reduction. So, today, I’m laying out a set of specific proposals to finish whatwe started this summer -- proposals that live up to the principles I’ve talked about from thebeginning.  It’s a plan that reduces our debt by more than $4 trillion, and achieves thesesavings in a way that is fair -- by asking everybody to do their part so that no one has to beartoo much of the burden on their own.
All told, this plan cuts $2 in spending for every dollar in new revenues.  In addition to the $1trillion in spending that we’ve already cut from the budget, our plan makes additionalspending cuts that need to happen if we’re to solve this problem. We reform agriculturalsubsidies -- subsidies that a lot of times pay large farms for crops that they don't grow.  Wemake modest adjustments to federal retirement programs.  We reduce by tens of billions ofdollars the tax money that goes to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  We also ask the largestfinancial firms -- companies saved by tax dollars during the financial crisis -- to repay theAmerican people for every dime that we spent.  And we save an additional $1 trillion as weend the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
These savings are not only counted as part of our plan, but as part of the budget plan thatnearly every Republican on the House voted for. 
  
Finally, this plan includes structural reforms to reduce the cost of health care in programs likeMedicare and Medicaid.  Keep in mind we've already included a number of reforms in thehealth care law, which will go a long way towards controlling these costs.  But we're going tohave to do a little more.  This plan reduces wasteful subsidies and erroneous payments whilechanging some incentives that often lead to excessive health care costs.  It makesprescriptions more affordable through faster approval of generic drugs.  We’ll work withgovernors to make Medicaid more efficient and more accountable.  And we’ll change the waywe pay for health care.  Instead of just paying for procedures, providers will be paid morewhen they improve results -- and such steps will save money and improve care. 
These changes are phased in slowly to strengthen Medicare and Medicaid over time.  Becausewhile we do need to reduce health care costs, I’m not going to allow that to be an excuse forturning Medicare into a voucher program that leaves seniors at the mercy of the insuranceindustry.  And I'm not going to stand for balancing the budget by denying or reducing healthcare for poor children or those with disabilities.  So we will reform Medicare and Medicaid, butwe will not abandon the fundamental commitment that this country has kept for generations. 
And by the way, that includes our commitment to Social Security.  I've said before, SocialSecurity is not the primary cause of our deficits, but it does face long-term challenges as ourcountry grows older.  And both parties are going to need to work together on a separate trackto strengthen Social Security for our children and our grandchildren.
So this is how we can reduce spending:  by scouring the budget for every dime of waste andinefficiency, by reforming government spending, and by making modest adjustments toMedicare and Medicaid.  But all these reductions in spending, by themselves, will not solve ourfiscal problems.  We can’t just cut our way out of this hole.  It’s going to take a balancedapproach.  If we’re going to make spending cuts -- many of which we wouldn’t make if weweren’t facing such large budget deficits -- then it’s only right that we ask everyone to paytheir fair share.
You know, last week, Speaker of the House John Boehner gave a speech about the economy. And to his credit, he made the point that we can’t afford the kind of politics that says it’s “myway or the highway.”  I was encouraged by that.  Here’s the problem: In that same speech,he also came out against any plan to cut the deficit that includes any additional revenueswhatsoever.  He said -- I'm quoting him -- there is “only one option.”  And that option andonly option relies entirely on cuts.  That means slashing education, surrendering the researchnecessary to keep America’s technological edge in the 21st century, and allowing our criticalpublic assets like highways and bridges and airports to get worse.  It would cripple ourcompetiveness and our ability to win the jobs of the future.  And it would also mean askingsacrifice of seniors and the middle class and the poor, while asking nothing of the wealthiestAmericans and biggest corporations. 
  
So the Speaker says we can’t have it "my way or the highway," and then basically says, myway -- or the highway.  That’s not smart.  It’s not right.  If we’re going to meet ourresponsibilities, we have to do it together. 
Now, I’m proposing real, serious cuts in spending.  When you include the $1 trillion in cutsI’ve already signed into law, these would be among the biggest cuts in spending in ourhistory. But they’ve got to be part of a larger plan that’s balanced –- a plan that asks the mostfortunate among us to pay their fair share, just like everybody else.
And that’s why this plan eliminates tax loopholes that primarily go to the wealthiest taxpayersand biggest corporations –- tax breaks that small businesses and middle-class families don’tget.  And if tax reform doesn't get done, this plan asks the wealthiest Americans to go back topaying the same rates that they paid during the 1990s, before the Bush tax cuts.
I promise it’s not because anybody looks forward to the prospects of raising taxes or payingmore taxes.  I don’t.  In fact, I’ve cut taxes for the middle class and for small businesses, andthrough the American Jobs Act, we’d cut taxes again to promote hiring and put more moneyinto the pockets of people.  But we can’t afford these special lower rates for the wealthy -–rates, by the way, that were meant to be temporary.  Back when these first -- these tax cuts,back in 2001, 2003, were being talked about, they were talked about temporary measures. We can’t afford them when we’re running these big deficits.
Now, I am also ready to work with Democrats and Republicans to reform our entire tax code,to get rid of the decades of accumulated loopholes, special interest carve-outs, and other taxexpenditures that stack the deck against small business owners and ordinary families whocan’t afford Washington lobbyists or fancy accountants.  Our tax code is more than 10,000pages long. If you stack up all the volumes, they’re almost five feet tall.  That means that howmuch you pay often depends less on what you make and more on how well you can game thesystem, and that's especially true of the corporate tax code.
We’ve got one of the highest corporate tax rates in the world, but it’s riddled with exceptionsand special interest loopholes.  So some companies get out paying a lot of taxes, while therest of them end up having to foot the bill.  And this makes our entire economy lesscompetitive and our country a less desirable place to do business. 
That has to change.  Our tax code shouldn’t give an advantage to companies with the best-
connected lobbyists.  It should give an advantage to companies that invest in the UnitedStates of America and create jobs in the United States of America.  And we can lower thecorporate rate if we get rid of all these special deals.
So I am ready, I am eager, to work with Democrats and Republicans to reform the tax code tomake it simpler, make it fairer, and make America more competitive.  But any reform plan willhave to raise revenue to help close our deficit.  That has to be part of the formula.
  
And any reform should follow another simple principle:  Middle-class families shouldn’t payhigher taxes than millionaires and billionaires.  That’s pretty straightforward.  It’s hard toargue against that.  Warren Buffett’s secretary shouldn’t pay a higher tax rate than WarrenBuffett.  There is no justification for it. 
It is wrong that in the United States of America, a teacher or a nurse or a construction workerwho earns $50,000 should pay higher tax rates than somebody pulling in $50 million. Anybody who says we can’t change the tax code to correct that, anyone who has signed somepledge to protect every single tax loophole so long as they live, they should be called out. They should have to defend that unfairness -- explain why somebody who's making  $50million a year in the financial markets should be paying 15 percent on their taxes, when ateacher making $50,000 a year is paying more than that -- paying a higher rate.  They oughtto have to answer for it.  And if they’re pledged to keep that kind of unfairness in place, theyshould remember, the last time I checked the only pledge that really matters is the pledge wetake to uphold the Constitution. 
Now, we’re already hearing the usual defenders of these kinds of loopholes saying this is just“class warfare.”  I reject the idea that asking a hedge fund manager to pay the same tax rateas a plumber or a teacher is class warfare.  I think it’s just the right the thing to do.  I believethe American middle class, who've been pressured relentlessly for decades, believe it’s timethat they were fought for as hard as the lobbyists and some lawmakers have fought to protectspecial treatment for billionaires and big corporations.
Nobody wants to punish success in America.  What’s great about this country is our belief thatanyone can make it and everybody should be able to try -– the idea that any one of us canopen a business or have an idea and make us millionaires or billionaires.  This is the land ofopportunity.  That’s great.  All I’m saying is that those who have done well, including me,should pay our fair share in taxes to contribute to the nation that made our success possible. We shouldn’t get a better deal than ordinary families get.  And I think most wealthyAmericans would agree if they knew this would help us grow the economy and deal with thedebt that threatens our future.
It comes down to this:  We have to prioritize.  Both parties agree that we need to reduce thedeficit by the same amount -- by $4 trillion.  So what choices are we going to make to reachthat goal?  Either we ask the wealthiest Americans to pay their fair share in taxes, or we’regoing to have to ask seniors to pay more for Medicare.  We can’t afford to do both. 
Either we gut education and medical research, or we’ve got to reform the tax code so that themost profitable corporations have to give up tax loopholes that other companies don’t get. We can’t afford to do both. 
This is not class warfare.  It’s math.
  
The money is going to have to come from someplace.  And if we’re not willing to ask thosewho've done extraordinarily well to help America close the deficit and we are trying to reachthat same target of $4 trillion, then the logic, the math says everybody else has to do a wholelot more:  We’ve got to put the entire burden on the middle class and the poor.  We’ve got toscale back on the investments that have always helped our economy grow.  We’ve got tosettle for second-rate roads and second-rate bridges and second-rate airports, and schoolsthat are crumbling. 
That’s unacceptable to me.  That’s unacceptable to the American people.  And it will nothappen on my watch.  I will not support -- I will not support -- any plan that puts all theburden for closing our deficit on ordinary Americans.  And I will veto any bill that changesbenefits for those who rely on Medicare but does not raise serious revenues by asking thewealthiest Americans or biggest corporations to pay their fair share.  We are not going to havea one-sided deal that hurts the folks who are most vulnerable. 
None of the changes I’m proposing are easy or politically convenient.  It’s always morepopular to promise the moon and leave the bill for after the next election or the election afterthat.  That’s been true since our founding.  George Washington grappled with this problem. He said, “Towards the payment of debts, there must be revenue; that to have revenue theremust be taxes; [and] no taxes can be devised which are not more or less inconvenient andunpleasant.”  He understood that dealing with the debt is -- these are his words -- “always achoice of difficulties.”  But he also knew that public servants weren’t elected to do what waseasy; they weren’t elected to do what was politically advantageous.  It’s our responsibility toput country before party.  It’s our responsibility to do what’s right for the future.
And that’s what this debate is about.  It’s not about numbers on a ledger; it’s not aboutfigures on a spreadsheet.  It’s about the economic future of this country, and it’s aboutwhether we will do what it takes to create jobs and growth and opportunity while facing up tothe legacy of debt that threatens everything we’ve built over generations.
And it’s also about fairness.  It’s about whether we are, in fact, in this together, and we’relooking out for one another.  We know what’s right.  It’s time to do what’s right. 
Thank you very much.
