PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, let me, first of all, welcome again Prime Minister Netanyahu, whoI think has now been here seven times during the course of my presidency. And I want toindicate that the frequency of these meetings is an indication of the extraordinary bondsbetween our two countries, as is the opportunity for the Prime Minister to address Congressduring his visit here. I know that’s an honor that’s reserved for those who have always shownthemselves to be a great friend of the United States and is indicative of the friendshipbetween our countries.
We just completed a prolonged and extremely useful conversation touching on a wide range ofissues. We discussed, first of all, the changes that are sweeping the region and what has beenhappening in places like Egypt and Syria and how they affect the interests and security of theUnited States and Israel, as well as the opportunity for prosperity, growth and development inthe Arab world.
We agreed that there is a moment of opportunity that can be seized as a consequence of theArab Spring, but also acknowledge that there’s significant perils as well, and that it’s going tobe important for the United States and Israel to consult closely as we see developmentsunfold. 
I outlined for the Prime Minister some of the issues that I discussed in my speech yesterday --how important it was going to be for the United States to support political reform, supporthuman rights, support freedom of speech, religious tolerance and economic development,particularly in Egypt, as the largest Arab country, as well as Tunisia, the country that firststarted this revolutionary movement that’s taking place throughout the Middle East and NorthAfrica.
  
We also discussed the situation in Syria, which is obviously of acute concern to Israel, givenits shared border. And I gave more details to the Prime Minister about the significant stepsthat we are taking to try to pressure Syria and the Assad regime to reform, including thesanctions that we placed directly on President Assad.
We continue to share our deep concerns about Iran, not only the threat that it poses to Israelbut also the threat that it poses to the region and the world if it were to develop a nuclearweapon. We updated our strategy to continue to apply pressure, both through sanctions andour other diplomatic work. And I reiterated my belief that it is unacceptable for Iran topossess a nuclear weapon.
We also discussed the hypocrisy of Iran suggesting that it somehow supports democratizationin the Middle East when, in fact, they first showed the repressive nature of that regime whenthey responded to the own peaceful protests that took place inside Iran almost two years ago.
Finally, we discussed the issue of a prospective peace between Israelis and Palestinians. And Ireiterated and we discussed in depth the principles that I laid out yesterday -- the belief thatour ultimate goal has to be a secure Israeli state, a Jewish state, living side by side in peaceand security with a contiguous, functioning and effective Palestinian state. 
Obviously there are some differences between us in the precise formulations and language,and that’s going to happen between friends. But what we are in complete accord about is thata true peace can only occur if the ultimate resolution allows Israel to defend itself againstthreats, and that Israel’s security will remain paramount in U.S. evaluations of anyprospective peace deal.
I said that yesterday in the speech, and I continue to believe it. And I think that it is possiblefor us to shape a deal that allows Israel to secure itself, not to be vulnerable, but also allows itto resolve what has obviously been a wrenching issue for both peoples for decades now.
I also pointed out, as I said in the speech yesterday, that it is very difficult for Israel to beexpected to negotiate in a serious way with a party that refuses to acknowledge its right toexist. And so for that reason I think the Palestinians are going to have to answer some verydifficult questions about this agreement that’s been made between Fatah and Hamas. Hamashas been and is an organization that has resorted to terror; that has refused to acknowledgeIsrael’s rights to exist. It is not a partner for a significant, realistic peace process. And so, as Isaid yesterday during the speech, the Palestinians are going to have to explain how they cancredibly engage in serious peace negotiations in the absence of observing the Quartetprinciples that have been put forward previously.
So, overall, I thought this was an extremely constructive discussion.
  
And coming out of this discussion, I once again can reaffirm that the extraordinarily closerelationship between the United States and Israel is sound and will continue, and thattogether, hopefully we are going to be able to work to usher in a new period of peace andprosperity in a region that is going to be going through some very profound transformations inthe coming weeks, months and years.
So, Mr. Prime Minister. 
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU: Thank you, Mr. President.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Thank you very much.
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU: Mr. President, first I want to thank you and the First Ladyfor the gracious hospitality that you’ve shown me, my wife, and our entire delegation. Wehave an enduring bond of friendship between our two countries, and I appreciate theopportunity to have this meeting with you after your important speech yesterday.
We share your hope and your vision for the spread of democracy in the Middle East. Iappreciate the fact that you reaffirmed once again now, and in our conversation, and in actualdeed the commitment to Israel’s security. We value your efforts to advance the peaceprocess. 
This is something that we want to have accomplished. Israel wants peace. I want peace. Whatwe all want is a peace that will be genuine, that will hold, that will endure. And I think that the-- we both agree that a peace based on illusions will crash eventually on the rocks of MiddleEastern reality, and that the only peace that will endure is one that is based on reality, onunshakeable facts.
I think for there to be peace, the Palestinians will have to accept some basic realities.
The first is that while Israel is prepared to make generous compromises for peace, it cannotgo back to the 1967 lines -- because these lines are indefensible; because they don’t take intoaccount certain changes that have taken place on the ground, demographic changes that havetaken place over the last 44 years.
Remember that, before 1967, Israel was all of nine miles wide. It was half the width of theWashington Beltway.
And these were not the boundaries of peace; they were the boundaries of repeated wars,because the attack on Israel was so attractive.
  
So we can't go back to those indefensible lines, and we're going to have to have a long-termmilitary presence along the Jordan.
I discussed this with the President and I think that we understand that Israel has certainsecurity requirements that will have to come into place in any deal that we make.
The second is -- echoes something the President just said, and that is that Israel cannotnegotiate with a Palestinian government that is backed by Hamas. Hamas, as the Presidentsaid, is a terrorist organization committed to Israel’s destruction. It’s fired thousands ofrockets on our cities, on our children. It’s recently fired an anti-tank rocket at a yellow schoolbus, killing a 16-year-old boy. And Hamas has just attacked you, Mr. President, and theUnited States for ridding the world of bin Laden.
So Israel obviously cannot be asked to negotiate with a government that is backed by thePalestinian version of al Qaeda.
I think President Abbas has a simple choice. He has to decide if he negotiates or keeps hispact with Hamas, or makes peace with Israel. And I can only express what I said to you justnow, that I hope he makes the choice, the right choice, in choosing peace with Israel.
The third reality is that the Palestinian refugee problem will have to be resolved in the contextof a Palestinian state, but certainly not in the borders of Israel. 
The Arab attack in 1948 on Israel resulted in two refugee problems -- Palestinian refugeeproblem and Jewish refugees, roughly the same number, who were expelled from Arab lands.Now, tiny Israel absorbed the Jewish refugees, but the vast Arab world refused to absorb thePalestinian refugees. Now, 63 years later, the Palestinians come to us and they say to Israel,accept the grandchildren, really, and the great grandchildren of these refugees, therebywiping out Israel’s future as a Jewish state.
So it’s not going to happen.
Everybody knows it’s not going to happen.
And I think it’s time to tell the Palestinians forthrightly it’s not going to happen. ThePalestinian refugee problem has to be resolved. It can be resolved, and it will be resolved ifthe Palestinians choose to do so in a Palestinian state. So that's a real possibility. But it’s notgoing to be resolved within the Jewish state.
The President and I discussed all these issues and I think we may have differences here andthere, but I think there’s an overall direction that we wish to work together to pursue a real,genuine peace between Israel and its Palestinian neighbors; a peace that is defensible.
  
Mr. President, you're the -- you're the leader of a great people, the American people. And I'mthe leader of a much smaller people, the --
PRESIDENT OBAMA: A great people.
PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU: It’s a great people, too. It’s the ancient nation of Israel.And, you know, we've been around for almost 4,000 years. We've experienced struggle andsuffering like no other people. We've gone through expulsions and pogroms and massacresand the murder of millions. But I can say that even at the dearth of -- even at the nadir of thevalley of death, we never lost hope and we never lost our dream of reestablishing a sovereignstate in our ancient homeland, the land of Israel.
And now it falls on my shoulders as the Prime Minister of Israel, at a time of extraordinaryinstability and uncertainty in the Middle East, to work with you to fashion a peace that willensure Israel’s security and will not jeopardize its survival. I take this responsibility with pridebut with great humility, because, as I told you in our conversation, we don't have a lot ofmargin for error. And because, Mr. President, history will not give the Jewish people anotherchance. 
So in the coming days and weeks and months, I intend to work with you to seek a peace thatwill address our security concerns, seek a genuine recognition that we wish from ourPalestinian neighbors to give a better future for Israel and for the entire region. 
And I thank you for the opportunity to exchange our views and to work together for thiscommon end. Thank you, Mr. President. 
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Thank you.
