Yesterday we remembered the innocent lives taken that terrible morning. Today we turn tothe urgent duty of protecting other lives without illusion and without fear.
We've accomplished much in the last year in Afghanistan and beyond. We have much yet todo in Afghanistan and beyond. Many nations represented here have joined in the fight againstglobal terror and the people of the United States are grateful.
The United Nations was born in the hope that survived a world war, the hope of a worldmoving toward justice, escaping old patterns of conflict and fear. The founding membersresolved that the peace of the world must never again be destroyed by the will andwickedness of any man.
We created a United Nations Security Council so that, unlike the League of Nations, ourdeliberations would be more than talk, our resolutions would be more than wishes. Aftergenerations of deceitful dictators and broken treaties and squandered lives, we've dedicatedourselves to standards of human dignity shared by all and to a system of security defended byall.

Today, these standards and this security are challenged.
Our commitment to human dignity is challenged by persistent poverty and raging disease. Thesuffering is great. And our responsibilities are clear. The United States is joining with theworld to supply aid where it reaches people and lifts up lives, to extend trade and theprosperity it brings, and to bring medical care where it is desperately needed. As a symbol ofour commitment to human dignity. The United States will return to UNESCO.
This organization has been reformed, and America will participate fully in its mission toadvance human rights and tolerance and learning. Our common security is challenged byregional conflicts, ethnic and religious strife that is ancient, but not inevitable.
In the Middle East there can be no peace for either side without freedom for both sides.
America stands committed to an independent and democratic Palestine, living side-by-sidewith Israel in peace and security. Like all other people, Palestinians deserve a governmentthat serves their interests and listens to their voices. My nation will continue to encourage allparties to step up to their responsibilities as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement tothe conflict.
Above all, our principles and our security are challenged today by outlaw groups and regimesthat accept no law of morality and have no limit to their violent ambitions. In the attacks onAmerica a year ago, we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies. This threat hides withinmany nations, including my own.
In cells, in camps, terrorists are plotting further destruction and building new bases for theirwar against civilization. And our greatest fear is that terrorists will find a shortcut to their madambitions when an outlaw regime supplies them with the technologies to kill on a massivescale. In one place and one regime, we find all these dangers in their most lethal andaggressive forms, exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations was born toconfront.
Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded Kuwait without provocation. And the regime's forces werepoised to continue their march to seize other countries and their resources. Had SaddamHussein been appeased instead of stopped, he would have endangered the peace and stabilityof the world. Yet this aggression was stopped by the might of coalition forces and the will ofthe United Nations.
To suspend hostilities, to spare himself, Iraq's dictator accepted a series of commitments. Theterms were clear to him and to all, and he agreed to prove he is complying with every one ofthose obligations. He has proven instead only his contempt for the United Nations and for allhis pledges. By breaking every pledge, by his deceptions and by his cruelties, Saddam Husseinhas made the case against himself.

In 1991, Security Council Resolution 688 demanded that the Iraqi regime cease at once therepression of its own people, including the systematic repression of minorities, which thecouncil said threatened international peace and security in the region. This demand goesignored.
Last year, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq continues to commitextremely grave violations of human rights and that the regime's repression is all-pervasive.
Tens of thousands of political opponents and ordinary citizens have been subjected toarbitrary arrest and imprisonment, summary execution and torture by beating and burning,electric shock, starvation, mutilation and rape. 
Wives are tortured in front of their husbands; children in the presence of their parents; and allof these horrors concealed from the world by the apparatus of a totalitarian state. 
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolutions 686 and 687, demanded that Iraqreturn all prisoners from Kuwait and other lands. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this promise. 
Last year, the Secretary General's high-level coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwaiti,Saudi, Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini and Armeni nationals remainunaccounted for; more than 600 people. One American pilot is among them. 
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council through Resolution 687 demanded that Iraq renounce allinvolvement with terrorism and permit no terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. 
Iraq's regime agreed that broke this promise. 
In violation of Security Council Resolution 1373, Iraq continues to shelter and support terroristorganizations that direct violence against Iran, Israel and Western governments. Iraqidissidents abroad are targeted for murder. 
In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Amir of Kuwait and a former American president.Iraq's government openly praised the attacks of September 11. And Al Qaeda terroristsescaped from Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq. 
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed destroy and stop developing all weapons of mass destructionand long range missiles and to prove to the world it has done so by complying with rigorousinspections. 
Iraq has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge.

From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had no biological weapons. After a senior officialin its weapons program defected and exposed this lie, the regime admitted to producing tensof thousands of liters of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for use with scudwarheads, aerial bombs and aircraft spray tanks. 
U.N. inspectors believe Iraq has produced two to four times the amount of biological agents itdeclared and has failed to account for more than three metric tons of material that could beused to produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is expanding and improving facilities thatwere used for the production of biological weapons. 
United Nations' inspections also reviewed that Iraq like maintains stockpiles of VX, mustardand other chemical agents, and that the regime is rebuilding and expanding facilities capableof producing chemical weapons. 
And in 1995, after four years of deception, Iraq finally admitted it had a crash nuclearweapons program prior to the Gulf War. 
We know now, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq would likely have possessed anuclear weapon no later than 1993. 
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important information about its nuclear program, weaponsdesign, procurement logs, experiment data, and accounting of nuclear materials anddocumentation of foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear scientists and technicians.It retains physical infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. 
Iraq has made several attempts to buy high-strength aluminum tubes used to enrich uraniumfor a nuclear weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would be able to build a nuclearweapon within a year. 
And Iraq's state-controlled media has reported numerous meetings between Saddam Husseinand his nuclear scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued appetite for these weapons. 
Iraq also possesses a force of SCUD type missiles with ranges beyond the 150 kilometerspermitted by the U.N. Work at testing and production facilities shows that Iraq is buildingmore long range missiles that can inflict mass death throughout the region. 
In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the world imposed economic sanctions on Iraq. Thosesanctions were maintained after the war to compel the regime's compliance with SecurityCouncil Resolutions.

In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy food. Saddam Hussein has subverted thisprogram, working around the sanctions to buy missile technology and military materials. Heblames the suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even as he uses his oil wealth tobuild lavish palaces for himself and to buy arms for his country. 
By refusing to comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for the hunger and miseryof innocent Iraqi citizens. In 1991, Iraq promised U.N. inspectors immediate and unrestrictedaccess to verify Iraq's commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass destruction and long rangemissiles. Iraq broke this promise, spending seven years deceiving, evading and harassing U.N.inspectors before ceasing cooperation entirely. 
Just months after the 1991 cease-fire, the Security Council twice renewed its demand that theIraqi regime cooperate fully with inspectors, condemning Iraq's serious violations of itsobligations. 
The Security Council again renewed that demand in 1994, and twice more in 1996, deploringIraq's clear violations of its obligations. The Security Council renewed its demand three moretimes in 1997, citing flagrant violations, and three more times in 1998, calling Iraq's behaviortotally unacceptable. And in 1999, the demand was renewed yet again. 
As we meet today, it's been almost four years since the last U.N. inspector set foot in Iraq --four years for the Iraqi regime to plan and to build and to test behind the cloak of secrecy. Weknow that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder even when inspectors were inhis country. Are we to assume that he stopped when they left? 
The history, the logic and the facts lead to one conclusion: Saddam Hussein regime is a graveand gathering danger. 
To suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To assume this regime's good faith is tobet the lives of millions and the peace of the world in a reckless gamble, and this is a risk wemust not take. 
Delegates to the General Assembly, we have been more than patient. We've tried sanctions.We've tried the carrot of oil for food and the stick of coalition military strikes. But SaddamHussein has defied all these efforts and continues to develop weapons of mass destruction. 
The first time we may be completely certain he has nuclear weapons is when, God forbid, heuses one. We owe it to all our citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that day fromcoming. 
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the authority of the United Nations and a threatto peace. Iraq has answered a decade of U.N. demands with a decade of defiance. All theworld now faces a test, and the United Nations a difficult and defining moment.

Are Security Council resolutions to be honored and enforced or cast aside withoutconsequence? 
Will the United Nations serve the purpose of its founding or will it be irrelevant? 
The United States help found the United Nations. We want the United Nations to be effectiveand respectful and successful. We want the resolutions of the world's most importantmultilateral body to be enforced. And right now those resolutions are being unilaterallysubverted by the Iraqi regime. 
Our partnership of nations can meet the test before us by making clear what we now expectof the Iraqi regime. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately and unconditionally forswear, disclose andremove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction, long-range missiles and all relatedmaterial. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end all support for terrorism and act tosuppress it -- as all states are required to do by U.N. Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease persecution of its civilian population, includingShi'a, Sunnis, Kurds, Turkemens and others -- again, as required by Security Councilresolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or account for all Gulf War personnel whosefate is still unknown. 
It will return the remains of any who are deceased, return stolen property, accept liability forlosses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait and fully cooperate with international efforts toresolve these issues as required by Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil-for-foodprogram. It will accept U.N. administration of funds from that program to ensure that themoney is used fairly and promptly for the benefit of the Iraqi people. 
If all these steps are taken, it will signal a new openness and accountability in Iraq and itcould open the prospect of the United Nations helping to build a government that representsall Iraqis, a government based on respect for human rights, economic liberty andinternationally supervised elections. 
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi people. They've suffered too long in silentcaptivity. Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great moral cause and a great strategic goal.

The people of Iraq deserve it. The security of all nations requires it. Free societies do notintimidate through cruelty and conquest. And open societies do not threaten the world withmass murder. The United States supports political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq. 
We can harbor no illusions, and that's important today to remember. Saddam Husseinattacked Iran in 1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He's fired ballistic missiles at Iran and SaudiArabia, Bahrain and Israel. His regime once ordered the killing of every person between theages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iraniansand 40 Iraqi villages. 
My nation will work with the U.N. Security Council to meet our common challenge. If Iraq'sregime defies us again, the world must move deliberately, decisively to hold Iraq to account.We will work with the U.N. Security Council for the necessary resolutions. 
But the purposes of the United States should not be doubted. The Security Council resolutionswill be enforced, the just demands of peace and security will be met or action will beunavoidable and a regime that has lost its legitimacy will also lose its power. 
Events can turn in one of two ways. If we fail to act in the face of danger, the people of Iraqwill continue to live in brutal submission. The regime will have new power to bully anddominate and conquer its neighbors, condemning the Middle East to more years of bloodshedand fear. The regime will remain unstable -- the region will remain unstable, with little hope offreedom and isolated from the progress of our times. 
With every step the Iraqi regime takes toward gaining and deploying the most terribleweapons, our own options to confront that regime will narrow. And if an emboldened regimewere to supply these weapons to terrorists allies, then the attacks of September 11 would bea prelude to far greater horrors. 
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome this danger, we can arrive at a very differentfuture. The people of Iraq can shake off their captivity. They can one day join a democraticAfghanistan and a democratic Palestine inspiring reforms throughout the Muslim world. Thesenations can show by their example that honest government and respect for women and thegreat Islamic tradition of learning can triumph in the Middle East and beyond. And we willshow that the promise of the United Nations can be fulfilled in our time. 
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have been set before us. We must choose betweena world of fear and a world of progress. We cannot stand by and do nothing while dangersgather. We must stand up for our security and for the permanent rights and the hopes ofmankind. 
By heritage and by choice, the United States of America will make that stand. And, delegatesto the United Nations, you have the power to make that stand, as well. Thank you very much.