Thank you, Senator. I, too, am really pleased that President Obama and Mrs. Obama have
come down to Dallas. I also want to welcome [the] vice president and Mrs. Biden; Mr. Mayor;Chief Brown; elected officials; members of the law enforcement community.
Today the nation grieves, but those of us who love Dallas and call it home have had five
deaths in the family. Laura and I see members of law enforcement every day. We count -- We
count them as our friends. And we know, like for every other American, that their courage isour protection and shield.
We’re proud of the men we mourn and the community that has rallied to honor them and
support the wounded. Our mayor and police chief and our police department have beenmighty inspirations for the rest of the nation.

These slain officers were the best among us:
- Lorne Ahrens, beloved husband to detective Katrina Ahrens and father of two;
- Michael Krol, caring son, brother, uncle, nephew, and friend;
- Michael Smith, U.S. Army veteran, devoted husband, and father of two;
- Brent Thompson, Marine Corps vet, recently married;
- Patrick Zamarippa, U.S. Navy Reserve combat veteran, proud father, and loyal TexasRangers fan.
With their deaths, we have lost so much. We are grief stricken, heartbroken, and forevergrateful.
Every officer has accepted a calling that sets them apart. Most of us imagine if the moment
called for, that we would risk our lives to protect a spouse or a child. Those wearing the
uniform assume that risk for the safety of strangers. They and their families share theunspoken knowledge that each new day can bring new dangers.
But none of us were prepared, or could be prepared, for an ambush by hatred and malice. Theshock of this evil still has not faded.
At times it seems like the forces pulling us apart are stronger than the forces binding us
together. Argument turns too easily into animosity. Disagreement escalates too quickly intode-humanization.
Too often we judge other groups by their worst examples, while judging ourselves by our best
intentions. And this has -- And this has strained our bonds of understanding and commonpurpose.

But Americans, I think, have a great advantage. To renew our unity, we only need to
remember our values. We have never been held together by blood or background. We arebound by things of the spirit, by shared commitments to common ideals.
At our best, we practice empathy, imagining ourselves in the lives and circumstances ofothers. This is the bridge across our nation’s deepest divisions.
And it's not merely a matter of tolerance, but of learning from the struggles and stories of ourfellow citizens and finding our better selves in the process.
At our best, we honor the image of God we see in one another. We recognize that we are
brothers and sisters, sharing the same brief moment on Earth and owing each other theloyalty of our shared humanity.
At our best, we know we have one country, one future, one destiny. We do not want the unity
of grief, nor do we want the unity of fear. We want the unity of hope, affection, and highpurpose.
We know that the kind of just, humane country we -- we want to build, that we have seen in
our best dreams, is made possible when men and women in uniform stand guard. At theirbest, when they’re trained and trusted and accountable, they free us from fear.
The Apostle Paul said, “For God gave us a spirit not of fear, but of strength and love and self-
control.”1 Those are the best responses to fear in the life of our country; and they’re the codeof the peace officer.
Today, all of us feel a sense of loss -- but not equally. I’d like to conclude with the word of the
families, the spouses, and especially the children of the fallen: Your loved one[’s] time with
you was too short. They did not get a chance to properly say goodbye. But they went where
duty called. They defended us, even to the end. They finished well. We will not forget whatthey did for us.

Your loss is unfair. We cannot explain it. We can stand beside you and share your grief. And
we can pray that God will comfort you with a hope deeper than sorrow and stronger thandeath.
May God bless you. 