Thank you for the honor of addressing this General Assembly. The American people respectthe idealism that gave life to this organization. And we respect the men and women of the
U.N., who stand for peace and human rights in every part of the world. Welcome to New YorkCity, and welcome to the United States of America.
During the past three years, I've addressed this General Assembly in a time of tragedy for my
country, and in times of decision for all of us. Now we gather at a time of tremendousopportunity for the U.N. and for all peaceful nations. For decades, the circle of liberty and
security and development has been expanding in our world. This progress has brought unity
to Europe, self-government to Latin America and Asia, and new hope to Africa. Now we havethe historic chance to widen the circle even further, to fight radicalism and terror with justiceand dignity, to achieve a true peace, founded on human freedom.

The United Nations and my country share the deepest commitments. Both the AmericanDeclaration of Independence and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaim the
equal value and dignity of every human life. That dignity is honored by the rule of law, limitson the power of the state, respect for women, protection of private property, free speech,
equal justice, and religious tolerance. That dignity is dishonored by oppression, corruption,tyranny, bigotry, terrorism and all violence against the innocent. And both of our founding
documents affirm that this bright line between justice and injustice -- between right andwrong -- is the same in every age, and every culture, and every nation.
Wise governments also stand for these principles for very practical and realistic reasons. We
know that dictators are quick to choose aggression, while free nations strive to resolve
differences in peace. We know that oppressive governments support terror, while freegovernments fight the terrorists in their midst. We know that free peoples embrace progressand life, instead of becoming the recruits for murderous ideologies.
Every nation that wants peace will share the benefits of a freer world. And every nation thatseeks peace has an obligation to help build that world. Eventually, there is no safe isolation
from terror networks, or failed states that shelter them, or outlaw regimes, or weapons ofmass destruction. Eventually, there is no safety in looking away, seeking the quiet life byignoring the struggles and oppression of others.
In this young century, our world needs a new definition of security. Our security is not merely
found in spheres of influence, or some balance of power. The security of our world is found inthe advancing rights of mankind.
These rights are advancing across the world -- and across the world, the enemies of human
rights are responding with violence. Terrorists and their allies believe the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights and the American Bill of Rights, and every charter of liberty ever
written, are lies, to be burned and destroyed and forgotten. They believe that dictators should
control every mind and tongue in the Middle East and beyond. They believe that suicide andtorture and murder are fully justified to serve any goal they declare. And they act on theirbeliefs.
In the last year alone, terrorists have attacked police stations, and banks, and commutertrains, and synagogues -- and a school filled with children. This month in Beslan we saw, once
again, how the terrorists measure their success -- in the death of the innocent, and in the painof grieving families.

Svetlana Dzebisov was held hostage, along with her son and her nephew -- her nephew didnot survive. She recently visited the cemetery, and saw what she called the "little graves."
She said, "I understand that there is evil in the world. But what have these little creaturesdone?"
Members of the United Nations, the Russian children did nothing to deserve such awful
suffering, and fright, and death. The people of Madrid and Jerusalem and Istanbul andBaghdad have done nothing to deserve sudden and random murder. These acts violate the
standards of justice in all cultures, and the principles of all religions. All civilized nations are inthis struggle together, and all must fight the murderers.
We're determined to destroy terror networks wherever they operate, and the United States isgrateful to every nation that is helping to seize terrorist assets, track down their operatives,
and disrupt their plans. We're determined to end the state sponsorship of terror -- and mynation is grateful to all that participated in the liberation of Afghanistan. We're determined to
prevent proliferation, and to enforce the demands of the world -- and my nation is grateful tothe soldiers of many nations who have helped to deliver the Iraqi people from an outlawdictator.
The dictator agreed in 1991, as a condition of a cease-fire, to fully comply with all Security
Council resolutions -- then ignored more than a decade of those resolutions. Finally, theSecurity Council promised serious consequences for his defiance. And the commitments we
make must have meaning. When we say "serious consequences," for the sake of peace, theremust be serious consequences. And so a coalition of nations enforced the just demands of theworld.
Defending our ideals is vital, but it is not enough. Our broader mission as U.N. members is toapply these ideals to the great issues of our time. Our wider goal is to promote hope and
progress as the alternatives to hatred and violence. Our great purpose is to build a betterworld beyond the war on terror.
Because we believe in human dignity, America and many nations have established a globalfund to fight AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria. In three years the contributing countries have
funded projects in more than 90 countries, and pledged a total of $5.6 billion to these efforts.America has undertaken a $15 billion effort to provide prevention and treatment and humane
care in nations afflicted by AIDS, placing a special focus on 15 countries where the need ismost urgent. AIDS is the greatest health crisis of our time, and our unprecedentedcommitment will bring new hope to those who have walked too long in the shadow of death.

Because we believe in human dignity, America and many nations have joined together toconfront the evil of trafficking in human beings. We're supporting organizations that rescue
the victims, passing stronger anti-trafficking laws, and warning travelers that they will be heldto account for supporting this modern form of slavery. Women and children should never beexploited for pleasure or greed, anywhere on Earth.
Because we believe in human dignity, we should take seriously the protection of life fromexploitation under any pretext. In this session, the U.N. will consider a resolution sponsored
by Costa Rica calling for a comprehensive ban on human cloning. I support that resolution andurge all governments to affirm a basic ethical principle: No human life should ever beproduced or destroyed for the benefit of another.
Because we believe in human dignity, America and many nations have changed the way we
fight poverty, curb corruption, and provide aid. In 2002 we created the Monterrey Consensus,a bold approach that links new aid from developed nations to real reform in developing ones.
And through the Millennium Challenge Account, my nation is increasing our aid to developingnations that expand economic freedom and invest in the education and health of their ownpeople.
Because we believe in human dignity, America and many nations have acted to lift the
crushing burden of debt that limits the growth of developing economies, and holds millions ofpeople in poverty. Since these efforts began in 1996, poor countries with the heaviest debt
burdens have received more than $30 billion of relief. And to prevent the build-up of futuredebt, my country and other nations have agreed that international financial institutions shouldincreasingly provide new aid in the form of grants, rather than loans.
Because we believe in human dignity, the world must have more effective means to stabilizeregions in turmoil, and to halt religious violence and ethnic cleansing. We must create
permanent capabilities to respond to future crises. The United States and Italy have proposed
a Global Peace Operations Initiative. G-8 countries will train 75,000 peacekeepers, initiallyfrom Africa, so they can conduct operations on that continent and elsewhere. The countries ofthe G-8 will help this peacekeeping force with deployment and logistical needs.
At this hour, the world is witnessing terrible suffering and horrible crimes in the Darfur regionof Sudan, crimes my government has concluded are genocide. The United States played a key
role in efforts to broker a cease-fire, and we're providing humanitarian assistance to theSudanese people. Rwanda and Nigeria have deployed forces in Sudan to help improve security
so aid can be delivered.

The Security Council adopted a new resolution that supports an expanded African Union forceto help prevent further bloodshed, and urges the government of Sudan to stop flights by
military aircraft in Darfur. We congratulate the members of the Council on this timely andnecessary action. I call on the government of Sudan to honor the cease-fire it signed, and tostop the killing in Darfur.
Because we believe in human dignity, peaceful nations must stand for the advance ofdemocracy. No other system of government has done more to protect minorities, to secure
the rights of labor, to raise the status of women, or to channel human energy to the pursuitsof peace. We've witnessed the rise of democratic governments in predominantly Hindu and
Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish and Christian cultures. Democratic institutions have taken root in
modern societies, and in traditional societies. When it comes to the desire for liberty andjustice, there is no clash of civilizations. People everywhere are capable of freedom, andworthy of freedom.
Finding the full promise of representative government takes time, as America has found in twocenturies of debate and struggle. Nor is there any -- only one form of representative
government -- because democracies, by definition, take on the unique character of thepeoples that create them. Yet this much we know with certainty: The desire for freedom
resides in every human heart. And that desire cannot be contained forever by prison walls, ormartial laws, or secret police. Over time, and across the Earth, freedom will find a way.
Freedom is finding a way in Iraq and Afghanistan -- and we must continue to show ourcommitment to democracies in those nations. The liberty that many have won at a cost must
be secured. As members of the United Nations, we all have a stake in the success of theworld's newest democracies.
Not long ago, outlaw regimes in Baghdad and Kabul threatened the peace and sponsored
terrorists. These regimes destabilized one of the world's most vital -- and most volatile --
regions. They brutalized their peoples, in defiance of all civilized norms. Today, the Iraqi andAfghan people are on the path to democracy and freedom. The governments that are rising
will pose no threat to others. Instead of harboring terrorists, they're fighting terrorist groups.And this progress is good for the long-term security of us all.
The Afghan people are showing extraordinary courage under difficult conditions. They're
fighting to defend their nation from Taliban holdouts, and helping to strike against theterrorists killers. They're reviving their economy. They've adopted a constitution that protects
the rights of all, while honoring their nation's most cherished traditions.

More than 10 million Afghan citizens -- over 4 million of them women -- are now registered tovote in next month's presidential election. To any who still would question whether Muslimsocieties can be democratic societies, the Afghan people are giving their answer.
Since the last meeting of this General Assembly, the people of Iraq have regainedsovereignty. Today, in this hall, the Prime Minister of Iraq and his delegation represent a
country that has rejoined the community of nations. The government of Prime Minister Allawihas earned the support of every nation that believes in self-determination and desires peace.
And under Security Council resolutions 1511 and 1546, the world is providing that support.The U.N., and its member nations, must respond to Prime Minister Allawi's request, and domore to help build an Iraq that is secure, democratic, federal, and free.
A democratic Iraq has ruthless enemies, because terrorists know the stakes in that country.
They know that a free Iraq in the heart of the Middle East will be a decisive blow against theirambitions for that region. So a terrorists group associated with al Qaeda is now one of the
main groups killing the innocent in Iraq today -- conducting a campaign of bombings againstcivilians, and the beheadings of bound men. Coalition forces now serving in Iraq are
confronting the terrorists and foreign fighters, so peaceful nations around the world will neverhave to face them within our own borders.
Our coalition is standing beside a growing Iraqi security force. The NATO Alliance is providingvital training to that force. More than 35 nations have contributed money and expertise to
help rebuild Iraq's infrastructure. And as the Iraqi interim government moves toward nationalelections, officials from the United Nations are helping Iraqis build the infrastructure of
democracy. These selfless people are doing heroic work, and are carrying on the great legacyof Sergio de Mello.
As we have seen in other countries, one of the main terrorist goals is to undermine, disrupt,
and influence election outcomes. We can expect terrorist attacks to escalate as Afghanistan
and Iraq approach national elections. The work ahead is demanding. But these difficulties willnot shake our conviction that the future of Afghanistan and Iraq is a future of liberty. Theproper response to difficulty is not to retreat, it is to prevail.
The advance of freedom always carries a cost, paid by the bravest among us. America mournsthe losses to our nation, and to many others. And today, I assure every friend of Afghanistan
and Iraq, and every enemy of liberty: We will stand with the people of Afghanistan and Iraquntil their hopes of freedom and security are fulfilled.

These two nations will be a model for the broader Middle East, a region where millions havebeen denied basic human rights and simple justice. For too long, many nations, including my
own, tolerated, even excused, oppression in the Middle East in the name of stability.Oppression became common, but stability never arrived. We must take a different approach.
We must help the reformers of the Middle East as they work for freedom, and strive to build acommunity of peaceful, democratic nations.
This commitment to democratic reform is essential to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. Peace
will not be achieved by Palestinian rulers who intimidate opposition, tolerate corruption, andmaintain ties to terrorist groups. The longsuffering Palestinian people deserve better. Theydeserve true leaders capable of creating and governing a free and peaceful Palestinian state.
Even after the setbacks and frustrations of recent months, goodwill and hard effort can
achieve the promise of the road map to peace. Those who would lead a new Palestinian stateshould adopt peaceful means to achieve the rights of their people, and create the reformed
institutions of a stable democracy. Arab states should end incitement in their own media, cutoff public and private funding for terrorism, and establish normal relations with Israel. Israel
should impose a settlement freeze, dismantle unauthorized outposts, end the daily humiliationof the Palestinian people, and avoid any actions that prejudice final negotiations. And world
leaders should withdraw all favor and support from any Palestinian ruler who fails his peopleand betrays their cause.
The democratic hopes we see growing in the Middle East are growing everywhere. In thewords of the Burmese democracy advocate, Aung San Suu Kyi:
We do not accept the notion that democracy is a Western value. To the contrary,
democracy simply means good government rooted in responsibility, transparency, andaccountability.1
Here at the United Nations, you know this to be true. In recent years, this organization hashelped create a new democracy in East Timor, and the U.N. has aided other nations in makingthe transition to self-rule.
Because I believe the advance of liberty is the path to both a safer and better world, today Ipropose establishing a Democracy Fund within the United Nations. This is a great calling for
this great organization.

The fund would help countries lay the foundations of democracy by instituting the rule of lawand independent courts, a free press, political parties and trade unions. Money from the fund
would also help set up voter precincts and polling places, and support the work of electionmonitors. To show our commitment to the new Democracy Fund, the United States will makean initial contribution. I urge other nations to contribute, as well.
Today, I've outlined a broad agenda to advance human dignity, and enhance the security ofall of us. The defeat of terror, the protection of human rights, the spread of prosperity, the
advance of democracy -- these causes, these ideals, call us to great work in the world. Each ofus alone can only do so much. Together, we can accomplish so much more.
History will honor the high ideals of this organization. The charter states them with clarity: "tosave succeeding generations from the scourge of war," "to reaffirm faith in fundamentalhuman rights," "to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom."
Let history also record that our generation of leaders followed through on these ideals, even inadversity. Let history show that in a decisive decade, members of the United Nations did not
grow weary in our duties, or waver in meeting them. I'm confident that this young century will
be liberty's century. I believe we will rise to this moment, because I know the character of somany nations and leaders represented here today. And I have faith in the transforming powerof freedom.
May God bless you.