Thank you all very much. Please be seated. Thanks for the warm welcome, and thanks forinviting me to join you in this 20th anniversary of the National Endowment for Democracy.The staff and directors of this organization have seen a lot of history over the last twodecades, you've been a part of that history. By speaking for and standing for freedom, you'velifted the hopes of people around the world, and you've brought great credit to America. 
 I appreciate Vin for the short introduction. I'm a man who likes short introductions. And hedidn't let me down. But more importantly, I appreciate the invitation. I appreciate themembers of Congress who are here, senators from both political parties, members of theHouse of Representatives from both political parties. I appreciate the ambassadors who arehere. I appreciate the guests who have come. I appreciate the bipartisan spirit, thenonpartisan spirit of the National Endowment for Democracy. I'm glad that Republicans andDemocrats and independents are working together to advance human liberty. 
The roots of our democracy can be traced to England, and to its Parliament -- and so can theroots of this organization. In June of 1982, President Ronald Reagan spoke at WestminsterPalace and declared, the turning point had arrived in history. He argued that Sovietcommunism had failed, precisely because it did not respect its own people -- their creativity,their genius and their rights.

President Reagan said that the day of Soviet tyranny was passing, that freedom had amomentum which would not be halted. He gave this organization its mandate: to add to themomentum of freedom across the world. Your mandate was important 20 years ago; it isequally important today. 
A number of critics were dismissive of that speech by the President. According to one editorialof the time, "It seems hard to be a sophisticated European and also an admirer of RonaldReagan." Some observers on both sides of the Atlantic pronounced the speech simplistic andnaive, and even dangerous. In fact, Ronald Reagan's words were courageous and optimisticand entirely correct. 
The great democratic movement President Reagan described was already well underway. Inthe early 1970s, there were about 40 democracies in the world. By the middle of that decade,Portugal and Spain and Greece held free elections. Soon there were new democracies in LatinAmerica, and free institutions were spreading in Korea, in Taiwan, and in East Asia. This veryweek in 1989, there were protests in East Berlin and in Leipzig. By the end of that year, everycommunist dictatorship in Central America* had collapsed. Within another year, the SouthAfrican government released Nelson Mandela. Four years later, he was elected president of hiscountry -- ascending, like Walesa and Havel, from prisoner of state to head of state. 
As the 20th century ended, there were around 120 democracies in the world -- and I canassure you more are on the way. Ronald Reagan would be pleased, and he would not besurprised. 
We've witnessed, in little over a generation, the swiftest advance of freedom in the 2,500 yearstory of democracy. Historians in the future will offer their own explanations for why thishappened. Yet we already know some of the reasons they will cite. It is no accident that therise of so many democracies took place in a time when the world's most influential nation wasitself a democracy. 
The United States made military and moral commitments in Europe and Asia, which protectedfree nations from aggression, and created the conditions in which new democracies couldflourish. As we provided security for whole nations, we also provided inspiration for oppressedpeoples. In prison camps, in banned union meetings, in clandestine churches, men andwomen knew that the whole world was not sharing their own nightmare. They knew of at leastone place -- a bright and hopeful land -- where freedom was valued and secure. And theyprayed that America would not forget them, or forget the mission to promote liberty aroundthe world. 
Historians will note that in many nations, the advance of markets and free enterprise helpedto create a middle class that was confident enough to demand their own rights. They will pointto the role of technology in frustrating censorship and central control -- and marvel at thepower of instant communications to spread the truth, the news, and courage across borders.

Historians in the future will reflect on an extraordinary, undeniable fact: Over time, freenations grow stronger and dictatorships grow weaker. In the middle of the 20th century, someimagined that the central planning and social regimentation were a shortcut to nationalstrength. In fact, the prosperity, and social vitality and technological progress of a people aredirectly determined by extent of their liberty. Freedom honors and unleashes human creativity-- and creativity determines the strength and wealth of nations. Liberty is both the plan ofHeaven for humanity, and the best hope for progress here on Earth. 
The progress of liberty is a powerful trend. Yet, we also know that liberty, if not defended, canbe lost. The success of freedom is not determined by some dialectic of history. By definition,the success of freedom rests upon the choices and the courage of free peoples, and upon theirwillingness to sacrifice. In the trenches of World War I, through a two-front war in the 1940s,the difficult battles of Korea and Vietnam, and in missions of rescue and liberation on nearlyevery continent, Americans have amply displayed our willingness to sacrifice for liberty. 
The sacrifices of Americans have not always been recognized or appreciated, yet they havebeen worthwhile. Because we and our allies were steadfast, Germany and Japan aredemocratic nations that no longer threaten the world. A global nuclear standoff with theSoviet Union ended peacefully -- as did the Soviet Union. The nations of Europe are movingtowards unity, not dividing into armed camps and descending into genocide. Every nation haslearned, or should have learned, an important lesson: Freedom is worth fighting for, dying for,and standing for -- and the advance of freedom leads to peace. 
And now we must apply that lesson in our own time. We've reached another great turningpoint -- and the resolve we show will shape the next stage of the world democraticmovement. 
Our commitment to democracy is tested in countries like Cuba and Burma and North Koreaand Zimbabwe -- outposts of oppression in our world. The people in these nations live incaptivity, and fear and silence. Yet, these regimes cannot hold back freedom forever -- and,one day, from prison camps and prison cells, and from exile, the leaders of new democracieswill arrive. Communism, and militarism and rule by the capricious and corrupt are the relics ofa passing era. And we will stand with these oppressed peoples until the day of their freedomfinally arrives. 
Our commitment to democracy is tested in China. That nation now has a sliver, a fragment ofliberty. Yet, China's people will eventually want their liberty pure and whole. China hasdiscovered that economic freedom leads to national wealth. China's leaders will also discoverthat freedom is indivisible -- that social and religious freedom is also essential to nationalgreatness and national dignity. Eventually, men and women who are allowed to control theirown wealth will insist on controlling their own lives and their own country.

Our commitment to democracy is also tested in the Middle East, which is my focus today, andmust be a focus of American policy for decades to come. In many nations of the Middle East --countries of great strategic importance -- democracy has not yet taken root. And thequestions arise: Are the peoples of the Middle East somehow beyond the reach of liberty? Aremillions of men and women and children condemned by history or culture to live indespotism? Are they alone never to know freedom, and never even to have a choice in thematter? I, for one, do not believe it. I believe every person has the ability and the right to befree. 
Some skeptics of democracy assert that the traditions of Islam are inhospitable to therepresentative government. This "cultural condescension," as Ronald Reagan termed it, has along history. After the Japanese surrender in 1945, a so-called Japan expert asserted thatdemocracy in that former empire would "never work." Another observer declared theprospects for democracy in post-Hitler Germany are, and I quote, "most uncertain at best" --he made that claim in 1957. Seventy-four years ago, The Sunday London Times declarednine-tenths of the population of India to be "illiterates not caring a fig for politics." Yet whenIndian democracy was imperiled in the 1970s, the Indian people showed their commitment toliberty in a national referendum that saved their form of government. 
Time after time, observers have questioned whether this country, or that people, or thisgroup, are "ready" for democracy -- as if freedom were a prize you win for meeting our ownWestern standards of progress. In fact, the daily work of democracy itself is the path ofprogress. It teaches cooperation, the free exchange of ideas, and the peaceful resolution ofdifferences. As men and women are showing, from Bangladesh to Botswana, to Mongolia, it isthe practice of democracy that makes a nation ready for democracy, and every nation canstart on this path. 
It should be clear to all that Islam -- the faith of one-fifth of humanity -- is consistent withdemocratic rule. Democratic progress is found in many predominantly Muslim countries -- inTurkey and Indonesia, and Senegal and Albania, Niger and Sierra Leone. Muslim men andwomen are good citizens of India and South Africa, of the nations of Western Europe, and ofthe United States of America. 
More than half of all the Muslims in the world live in freedom under democratically constitutedgovernments. They succeed in democratic societies, not in spite of their faith, but because ofit. A religion that demands individual moral accountability, and encourages the encounter ofthe individual with God, is fully compatible with the rights and responsibilities of self-
government. 
Yet there's a great challenge today in the Middle East. In the words of a recent report by Arabscholars, the global wave of democracy has -- and I quote -- "barely reached the Arab states."They continue: "This freedom deficit undermines human development and is one of the mostpainful manifestations of lagging political development."

The freedom deficit they describe has terrible consequences, of the people of the Middle Eastand for the world. In many Middle Eastern countries, poverty is deep and it is spreading,women lack rights and are denied schooling. Whole societies remain stagnant while the worldmoves ahead. These are not the failures of a culture or a religion. These are the failures ofpolitical and economic doctrines. 
As the colonial era passed away, the Middle East saw the establishment of many militarydictatorships. Some rulers adopted the dogmas of socialism, seized total control of politicalparties and the media and universities. They allied themselves with the Soviet bloc and withinternational terrorism. Dictators in Iraq and Syria promised the restoration of national honor,a return to ancient glories. They've left instead a legacy of torture, oppression, misery, andruin. 
Other men, and groups of men, have gained influence in the Middle East and beyond throughan ideology of theocratic terror. Behind their language of religion is the ambition for absolutepolitical power. Ruling cabals like the Taliban show their version of religious piety in publicwhippings of women, ruthless suppression of any difference or dissent, and support forterrorists who arm and train to murder the innocent. The Taliban promised religious purity andnational pride. Instead, by systematically destroying a proud and working society, they leftbehind suffering and starvation. 
Many Middle Eastern governments now understand that military dictatorship and theocraticrule are a straight, smooth highway to nowhere. But some governments still cling to the oldhabits of central control. There are governments that still fear and repress independentthought and creativity, and private enterprise -- the human qualities that make for a -- strongand successful societies. Even when these nations have vast natural resources, they do notrespect or develop their greatest resources -- the talent and energy of men and womenworking and living in freedom. 
Instead of dwelling on past wrongs and blaming others, governments in the Middle East needto confront real problems, and serve the true interests of their nations. The good and capablepeople of the Middle East all deserve responsible leadership. For too long, many people in thatregion have been victims and subjects -- they deserve to be active citizens. 
Governments across the Middle East and North Africa are beginning to see the need forchange. Morocco has a diverse new parliament; King Mohammed has urged it to extend therights to women. Here is how His Majesty explained his reforms to parliament: "How cansociety achieve progress while women, who represent half the nation, see their rights violatedand suffer as a result of injustice, violence, and marginalization, notwithstanding the dignityand justice granted to them by our glorious religion?" The King of Morocco is correct: Thefuture of Muslim nations will be better for all with the full participation of women.

In Bahrain last year, citizens elected their own parliament for the first time in nearly threedecades. Oman has extended the vote to all adult citizens; Qatar has a new constitution;Yemen has a multiparty political system; Kuwait has a directly elected national assembly; andJordan held historic elections this summer. Recent surveys in Arab nations reveal broadsupport for political pluralism, the rule of law, and free speech. These are the stirrings ofMiddle Eastern democracy, and they carry the promise of greater change to come. 
As changes come to the Middle Eastern region, those with power should ask themselves: Willthey be remembered for resisting reform, or for leading it? In Iran, the demand for democracyis strong and broad, as we saw last month when thousands gathered to welcome home ShirinEbadi, the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize. The regime in Teheran must heed the democraticdemands of the Iranian people, or lose its last claim to legitimacy. 
For the Palestinian people, the only path to independence and dignity and progress is the pathof democracy. And the Palestinian leaders who block and undermine democratic reform, andfeed hatred and encourage violence are not leaders at all. They're the main obstacles topeace, and to the success of the Palestinian people. 
The Saudi government is taking first steps toward reform, including a plan for gradualintroduction of elections. By giving the Saudi people a greater role in their own society, theSaudi government can demonstrate true leadership in the region. 
The great and proud nation of Egypt has shown the way toward peace in the Middle East, andnow should show the way toward democracy in the Middle East. Champions of democracy inthe region understand that democracy is not perfect, it is not the path to utopia, but it's theonly path to national success and dignity. 
As we watch and encourage reforms in the region, we are mindful that modernization is notthe same as Westernization. Representative governments in the Middle East will reflect theirown cultures. They will not, and should not, look like us. Democratic nations may beconstitutional monarchies, federal republics, or parliamentary systems. And workingdemocracies always need time to develop -- as did our own. We've taken a 200-year journeytoward inclusion and justice -- and this makes us patient and understanding as other nationsare at different stages of this journey. 
There are, however, essential principles common to every successful society, in every culture.Successful societies limit the power of the state and the power of the military -- so thatgovernments respond to the will of the people, and not the will of an elite. Successful societiesprotect freedom with the consistent and impartial rule of law, instead of selecting applying --selectively applying the law to punish political opponents. Successful societies allow room forhealthy civic institutions -- for political parties and labor unions and independent newspapersand broadcast media. Successful societies guarantee religious liberty -- the right to serve andhonor God without fear of persecution. Successful societies privatize their economies, andsecure the rights of property.

They prohibit and punish official corruption, and invest in the health and education of theirpeople. They recognize the rights of women. And instead of directing hatred and resentmentagainst others, successful societies appeal to the hopes of their own people. 
These vital principles are being applies in the nations of Afghanistan and Iraq. With the steadyleadership of President Karzai, the people of Afghanistan are building a modern and peacefulgovernment. Next month, 500 delegates will convene a national assembly in Kabul to approvea new Afghan constitution. The proposed draft would establish a bicameral parliament, setnational elections next year, and recognize Afghanistan's Muslim identity, while protecting therights of all citizens. Afghanistan faces continuing economic and security challenges -- it willface those challenges as a free and stable democracy. 
In Iraq, the Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraqi Governing Council are also workingtogether to build a democracy -- and after three decades of tyranny, this work is not easy.The former dictator ruled by terror and treachery, and left deeply ingrained habits of fear anddistrust. Remnants of his regime, joined by foreign terrorists, continue their battle againstorder and against civilization. Our coalition is responding to recent attacks with precisionraids, guided by intelligence provided by the Iraqis, themselves. And we're working closelywith Iraqi citizens as they prepare a constitution, as they move toward free elections and takeincreasing responsibility for their own affairs. As in the defense of Greece in 1947, and later inthe Berlin Airlift, the strength and will of free peoples are now being tested before a watchingworld. And we will meet this test. 
Securing democracy in Iraq is the work of many hands. American and coalition forces aresacrificing for the peace of Iraq and for the security of free nations. Aid workers from manycountries are facing danger to help the Iraqi people. The National Endowment for Democracyis promoting women's rights, and training Iraqi journalists, and teaching the skills of politicalparticipation. Iraqis, themselves -- police and borders guards and local officials -- are joiningin the work and they are sharing in the sacrifice. 
This is a massive and difficult undertaking -- it is worth our effort, it is worth our sacrifice,because we know the stakes. The failure of Iraqi democracy would embolden terrorists aroundthe world, increase dangers to the American people, and extinguish the hopes of millions inthe region. Iraqi democracy will succeed -- and that success will send forth the news, fromDamascus to Teheran -- that freedom can be the future of every nation. The establishment ofa free Iraq at the heart of the Middle East will be a watershed event in the global democraticrevolution. 
Sixty years of Western nations excusing and accommodating the lack of freedom in the MiddleEast did nothing to make us safe -- because in the long run, stability cannot be purchased atthe expense of liberty. As long as the Middle East remains a place where freedom does notflourish, it will remain a place of stagnation, resentment, and violence ready for export. Andwith the spread of weapons that can bring catastrophic harm to our country and to ourfriends, it would be reckless to accept the status quo.

Therefore, the United States has adopted a new policy, a forward strategy of freedom in theMiddle East. This strategy requires the same persistence and energy and idealism we haveshown before. And it will yield the same results. As in Europe, as in Asia, as in every region ofthe world, the advance of freedom leads to peace. 
The advance of freedom is the calling of our time; it is the calling of our country. From theFourteen Points to the Four Freedoms, to the Speech at Westminster, America has put ourpower at the service of principle. We believe that liberty is the design of nature; we believethat liberty is the direction of history. We believe that human fulfillment and excellence comein the responsible exercise of liberty. And we believe that freedom -- the freedom we prize --is not for us alone, it is the right and the capacity of all mankind. 
Working for the spread of freedom can be hard. Yet, America has accomplished hard tasksbefore. Our nation is strong; we're strong of heart. And we're not alone. Freedom is findingallies in every country; freedom finds allies in every culture. And as we meet the terror andviolence of the world, we can be certain the author of freedom is not indifferent to the fate offreedom. 
With all the tests and all the challenges of our age, this is, above all, the age of liberty. Eachof you at this Endowment is fully engaged in the great cause of liberty. And I thank you.
May God bless your work. And may God continue to bless America.