Holy Father, Laura and I are privileged to have you here at the White House. We welcome youwith the ancient words commended by Saint Augustine: "Pax Tecum." Peace be with you.
You've chosen to visit America on your birthday. Well, birthdays are traditionally spent withclose friends, so our entire nation is moved and honored that you've decided to share thisspecial day with us. We wish you much health and happiness -- today and for many years tocome.
This is your first trip to the United States since you ascended to the Chair of Saint Peter. Youwill visit two of our greatest cities and meet countless Americans, including many who havetraveled from across the country to see with you and to share in the joy of this visit. Here inAmerica you'll find a nation of prayer. Each day millions of our citizens approach our Maker onbended knee, seeking His grace and giving thanks for the many blessings He bestows uponus. Millions of Americans have been praying for your visit, and millions look forward to prayingwith you this week.

Here in America you'll find a nation of compassion. Americans believe that the measure of afree society is how we treat the weakest and most vulnerable among us. So each day citizensacross America answer the universal call to feed the hungry and comfort the sick and care forthe infirm. Each day across the world the United States is working to eradicate disease,alleviate poverty, promote peace and bring the light of hope to places still mired in thedarkness of tyranny and despair.
Here in America you'll find a nation that welcomes the role of faith in the public square. Whenour Founders declared our nation's independence, they rested their case on an appeal to the"laws of nature, and of nature's God." We believe in religious liberty. We also believe that alove for freedom and a common moral law are written into every human heart, and that theseconstitute the firm foundation on which any successful free society must be built.
Here in America, you'll find a nation that is fully modern, yet guided by ancient and eternaltruths. The United States is the most innovative, creative and dynamic country on earth -- itis also among the most religious. In our nation, faith and reason coexist in harmony. This isone of our country's greatest strengths, and one of the reasons that our land remains abeacon of hope and opportunity for millions across the world.
Most of all, Holy Father, you will find in America people whose hearts are open to yourmessage of hope. And America and the world need this message. In a world where someinvoke the name of God to justify acts of terror and murder and hate, we need your messagethat "God is love." And embracing this love is the surest way to save men from "falling prey tothe teaching of fanaticism and terrorism."
In a world where some treat life as something to be debased and discarded, we need yourmessage that all human life is sacred, and that "each of us is willed, each of us is loved" --and your message that "each of us is willed, each of us is loved, and each of us is necessary."
In a world where some no longer believe that we can distinguish between simple right andwrong, we need your message to reject this "dictatorship of relativism," and embrace aculture of justice and truth.
In a world where some see freedom as simply the right to do as they wish, we need yourmessage that true liberty requires us to live our freedom not just for ourselves, but "in a spiritof mutual support."
Holy Father, thank you for making this journey to America. Our nation welcomes you. Weappreciate the example you set for the world, and we ask that you always keep us in yourprayers.