Good afternoon. On my orders, the United States military has begun strikes against Al Qaedaterrorist training camps and military installations of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. Thesecarefully targeted actions are designed to disrupt the use of Afghanistan as a terrorist base ofoperations and to attack the military capability of the Taliban regime.
We are joined in this operation by our staunch friend, Great Britain. Other close friends,including Canada, Australia, Germany and France, have pledged forces as the operationunfolds. More than 40 countries in the Middle East, Africa, Europe, and across Asia havegranted air transit or landing rights. Many more have shared intelligence. We are supportedby the collective will of the world.
More than two weeks ago, I gave Taliban leaders a series of clear and specific demands: Closeterrorist training camps; hand over leaders of the Al Qaeda network; and return all foreignnationals, including American citizens, unjustly detained in your country. None of thesedemands was met. And now, the Taliban will pay a price.
By destroying camps and disrupting communications, we will make it more difficult for theterror network to train new recruits and coordinate their evil plans. Initially the terrorists mayburrow deeper into caves and other entrenched hiding places. Our military action is alsodesigned to clear the way for sustained, comprehensive, and relentless operations to drivethem out and bring them to justice.

At the same time, the oppressed people of Afghanistan will know the generosity of Americaand our allies. As we strike military targets, we will also drop food, medicine, and supplies tothe starving and suffering men and women and children of Afghanistan. The United States ofAmerica is a friend to the Afghan people, and we are the friends of almost a billion worldwidewho practice the Islamic faith. The United States of America is an enemy of those who aidterrorists and of the barbaric criminals who profane a great religion by committing murder inits name. This military action is a part of our campaign against terrorism, another front in awar that has already been joined through diplomacy, intelligence, the freezing of financialassets, and the arrests of known terrorists by law-enforcement agents in 38 countries.
Given the nature and reach of our enemies, we will win this conflict by the patientaccumulation of successes, by meeting a series of challenges with determination, and will, andpurpose. Today we focus on Afghanistan, but the battle is broader. Every nation has a choiceto make. In this conflict, there is no neutral ground. If any government sponsors the outlawsand killers of innocence, they have become outlaws and murderers themselves. And they willtake that lonely path at their own peril.
I'm speaking to you today from the Treaty Room of the White House, a place where Americanpresidents have worked for peace. We're a peaceful nation. Yet, as we have learned, sosuddenly and so tragically, there can be no peace in a world of sudden terror. In the face oftoday's new threat, the only way to pursue peace is to pursue those who threaten it. We didnot ask for this mission, but we will fulfill it.
The name of today's military operation is Enduring Freedom. We defend not only our preciousfreedoms, but also the freedom of people everywhere to live and raise their children free fromfear. 
I know many Americans feel fear today. And our government is taking strong precautions. Alllaw enforcement and intelligence agencies are working aggressively around America, aroundthe world -- and around the clock. At my request, many governors have activated the NationalGuard to strengthen airport security. We have called up reserves to reinforce our militarycapability and strengthen the protection of our homeland.
In the months ahead, our patience will be one of our strengths -- patience with the long waitsthat will result from tighter security, patience and understanding that it will take time toachieve our goals, patience in all the sacrifices that may come. Today, those sacrifices arebeing made by members of our armed forces who now defend us so far from home, and bytheir proud and worried families.
A Commander-in-Chief sends America's sons and daughters into battle in a foreign land onlyafter the greatest care and a lot of prayer. We ask a lot of those who wear our uniform. Weask them to leave their loved ones, to travel great distances, to risk injury, even to beprepared to make the ultimate sacrifice of their lives. They are dedicated. They are honorable.They represent the best of our country, and we are grateful.

To all the men and women in our military -- every sailor, every soldier, every airman, everyCoast Guardsman, every Marine -- I say this: Your mission is defined; your objectives areclear; your goal is just. You have my full confidence, and you will have every tool you need tocarry out your duty.
I recently received a touching letter that says a lot about the state of America in these difficulttimes, a letter from a fourth-grade girl with a father in the military: "As much as I don't wantmy dad to fight," she wrote, "I'm willing to give him to you." This is a precious gift. Thegreatest she could give. This young girl knows what America is all about. Since September 11,an entire generation of young Americans has gained new understanding of the value offreedom and its cost and duty and its sacrifice.
The battle is now joined on many fronts. We will not waiver, we will not tire, we will not falter,and we will not fail. Peace and freedom will prevail. 
Thank you. May God continue to bless America.