Thank you all.  As has been mentioned, in 2006 Laura and I came here to Warren EastonCharter High School a year after Katrina hit, and we are honored and pleased to be back inthe 10th anniversary of that devastating storm. I can’t think of a better place to come here inNew Orleans, except for some of the restaurants.
The slogan that guided the school when we first visited is true today:  “We believe in success.” And because of that success, that schools like this have achieved, you’ve given all Americansreason to believe that New Orleans is back and better than ever.
Mr. Mayor, thank you for your hospitality.  You and the First Lady have been so gracious tous, and we want to thank you for your leadership.  If enthusiasm and a good strategy counts,New Orleans is going to be -- is in good hands.  And we thank you very much.

By the way, I do bring greetings from one of the co-chairmen of the Bush KatrinaFund: [President George H.W. Bush] 41.  He had one of the great lines of all time.  He said,“Who would have thought getting out of bed at age 91 would be more dangerous thanjumping out of an airplane at age 90?”
I want to thank David Garland, President of the Warren Easton Charter Foundation Board.  Iwant to thank all the folks who have shown up.  As Laura said, we had a roundtablediscussion.  Many of our friends were there, people we worked with.  I think of NormanFrancis for example, one of the great leaders of New Orleans, one of the great minds of NewOrleans.
In spite of the devastation, we have many fond memories.  I remember sitting with [GeneralRussel L.] Honoré on top one of those big ships, strategizing.  I think you were drinking; Iwasn’t of course.  But it’s...great to see you. Surely, we’re honored that you took time tocome.  Obviously, members of Congress, members of the State House, Superintendent White,on and on, thank you all for coming.
I really want to thank the leadership of the school and we’ll talk about them here in a minute.Although I must confess, the Principal is always a teacher.  So she tried to teach me how tosecond line with the band here at Warren Easton.  I -- I know she didn’t say it, but she wasthinking, “This, this boy needs a lot of work.”  So we’re thrilled with your hospitality.
In a cruel twist, Hurricane Katrina brought despair during what should have been a season ofhope -- the start of the new school year.  Students who had recently gone back to schoolsuddenly had no school to go back to.  Many had nowhere to live.  The floodwaters, as you allknow better than most, claimed schools and homes alike.  As Laura mentioned, the stand --the ground we’re on today was underwater.  All of us who are old enough to remember willnever forget the images of our fellow Americans amid a sea of misery and ruin.  We’ll alwaysremember the lives lost across the Gulf Coast.  Their memories are in our hearts and I hopeyou pray for their families.
Hurricane Katrina is a story of loss beyond measure. It’s also a story of commitment andcompassion.
I hope you remember what I remember, and that is 30,000 people were saved in theimmediate aftermath of the storm by U.S. military personnel, by Louisiana law enforcement,and by citizens who volunteered.

I hope you remember what I remember, and that was the thousands who came here on avolunteer basis to provide food for the hungry and to help find shelter for those who had nohome to live in.  There are people all around our country who prayed for you, many of whomshowed up so they could say they helped a fellow citizen who was hurting.
One of the groups that stepped forward to serve were the educators of New Orleans.  At atime when it would have been easy to walk away from the wreckage, the educators heretoday thought of the children who would be left behind.  You understood that bringing NewOrleans back to life requires getting students back to school.  And even though some of theeducators had lost almost everything you owned, you let nothing stand in your way.  Today,we celebrate the resurgence of New Orleans’ schools. We honor the resilience of a greatAmerican city whose levees gave out but whose people never gave up.
Out of the devastation of Katrina, you vowed to do more than just open the schools.  Youvowed to challenge the status quo.  Long before the great flood, too many students in this citydrifted from grade to grade without ever learning the skills needed for success. Parents’lacked choices and the power to intervene.  Principals and teachers lacked the authority tochart a more hopeful course.  It was a system that stranded more than 60 percent of thestudents failing in schools.  It was what I called "the soft bigotry of low expectations."1
The decisions made in the dark hours after Katrina sparked a decade of reform.  Rather thanjust reopen the schools, we organized many into charter schools that are independentlyoperated but publicly accountable for achieving high standards.  More than nine in ten publicschool students in this city now call [a] charter school home.  Administrators at these schoolshave the freedom to slice through red tape and the freedom to innovate.  Parents at theseschools have choices if dissatisfied.  And the results at these schools have beenextraordinary.  The reason we know is because we measure, and any attempt to undermineaccountability in our school system does a huge disservice to the students who go to theschools in New Orleans.
According to the new report2 by the Cowen Institute, [the] percentage in New Orleans’students graduating on time has soared since Katrina. [The] percentage of students whoattended schools that score better than the state average almost doubled, and so has thepercentage of students meeting basic standards. And you’ve got to ask, “Why?”  It just didn’thappen.  A lot of it [was] structural, and a lot of it requires strong leadership -- people whostared into the eye of the storm and who refused to back down.  And so Laura and I are herein New Orleans to remind our country about what strong leadership means, and we’re here tosalute the leaders.

I think of Jenny Rious here at Warren Easton.  After Katrina, Jenny left New Orleans and wasforced to leave New Orleans. She started a website called “Warren Easton in Exile.” The sitereunited students scattered across the country around a vision for returning to New Orleansand reopening this school.  When Jenny returned to New Orleans, the first place she went wasnot her house.  It was this school.  And as she put it, “I would rather see my own house burndown than this school.”  Jenny would give anything for Easton and today, we give teacherslike hers our sincere thanks.
[It’s] amazing what happened in this city after the storm wiped out the school system. Educational entrepreneurs decided to do something about the devastation and the failure. I’ve met a lot of them when I was President, and subsequent to my presidency.  NeeravKingsland is one such person.  He took a leadership role at an organization called “NewSchools for New Orleans.” He worked with others to help launch dozens of new schools and toturn ideas in -- to reform into reality. In other words, this isn't a theoretical exercise. It’simportant for our country to look at New Orleans and realize this is an exercise ofimplementing a plan which works.
He -- He, so Neerav was so encouraged by what he sees here that he -- he’s talking up thereforms to other cities around the country.  Isn’t it amazing? The storm that nearly destroysNew Orleans, and yet now New -- New Orleans is the beacon for school reform. Neeravrepresent[s] the virtues that Bill Clinton and I had in mind when we announced the newPresidential Leadership Scholars program, and we’re honored that Neerav was among the firstclass of scholars.
Achieving these results took librarians who salvaged their collections from wateringwreckage.  Listen, I know something about librarians.  I married one.  I’m really proud of theLaura Bush Foundation.  She’s talked about the Grants -- talked about Pam and Marshall. These are citizens who supported this Foundation who, if they’d been in New Orleans, theydidn’t stay very long. And yet, like many around the country, they care deeply about thefuture of this city.  I hope the students here -- I’m really thrilled you’re here by the way andthank you for staying awake.  I hope you realize the compassion of others in helping yourealize a good education.
It turns out that every good school, a school that’s succeeding -- a school that' succeeding --and we know it’s succeeding, because we measure against other standards -- requires strongprincipals.  And there’s no doubt that Lexi Medley is a strong leader.  I love when she says --when she says, “If you fail, we fail.  The student’s our product.  We don’t believe in puttingout anything but the best.”

In order to succeed, in order to lead properly, you’ve got to set high goals and highexpectations.  And that’s what Lexi and this school have done.  As you heard, this school hasgraduated 100 percent of its seniors for the past five years.  Lexi, you’ve earned ouradmiration and our gratitude, along with our best wishes for a happy birthday tomorrow.
It’s the stories of schools like this one and others that we see a determination to rebuild betterthan before.  And it -- it's a spirit much stronger than any storm.  It’s a spirit that’s liftedcommunities laid low by tornadoes or terrorist attacks.  It’s a spirit that I saw in New Orleansten years ago, and that is very evident today.
We see that spirit in the population that has ticked back up as families settle back down.  Wesee it in the tourists who are drawn here not only by this city’s rich heritage but the new hotelrooms and restaurants.  We see it in the spirit in Lauren LeDuff.  As Laura mentioned --Lauren mentioned -- Laura and I first met her in 2006 when she was a senior at Easton. She's happy to be back at the school she loved -- She was happy to be back at the school sheloved at the time.  And you know what she told me?  She said, “I want to be a teacher.”  Andhere she is as a member of this faculty, teaching English.  I probably needed her when I wasin high school.  When asked how students have overcome adversity, Lauren says, “We teachour kids to be resilient.  That’s in the culture of this city.”
Lauren's right.  The resilience you teach at Warren Easton is the same resilience that this cityshowed the world in the wake of Hurricane Katrina.  On this anniversary, the work of makinga stronger and more hopeful New Orleans goes on.  You’ve achieved a lot over the last tenyears.  And with belief in success, and a faith in God, New Orleans will achieve even more. The darkness from a decade ago has lifted.  The Crescent City has risen again.  And its bestdays lie ahead.
Thank you for having me.