The issue of research involving stem cells derived from human embryos is increasingly the
subject of a national debate and dinner table discussions. The issue is confronted every day in
laboratories as scientists ponder the ethical ramifications of their work. It is agonized over by
parents and many couples as they try to have children or to save children already born. The
issue is debated within the church, with people of different faiths, even many of the samefaith, coming to different conclusions.
Many people are finding that the more they know about stem cell research, the less certainthey are about the right ethical and moral conclusions.
My administration must decide whether to allow federal funds, your tax dollars, to be used forscientific research on stem cells derived from human embryos.
A large number of these embryos already exist. They are the product of a process called in
vitro fertilization which helps so many couples conceive children.

When doctors match sperm and egg to create life outside the womb, they usually produce
more embryos than are implanted in the mother. Once a couple successfully has children or if
they are unsuccessful, the additional embryos remain frozen in laboratories. Some will not
survive during long storage, others are destroyed. A number have been donated to science
and used to create privately funded stem cell lines. And a few have  been implanted in anadoptive mother and born and are today healthy children.
Based on preliminary work that has been privately funded, scientists believe further research
using stem cells offers great promise that could help improve the lives of those who suffer
from many terrible diseases, from juvenile diabetesto Alzheimer, from Parkinsons to spinal
cord injuries. And while scientists admit they are not yet certain, they believe stem cellsderived from embryos have unique potential.
You should also know that stem cells can be derived from sources other than embryos: from
adult cells, from umbilical cords that are discarded after babies are born, from human
placentas. And many scientists feel research on these types of stem cells is also promising.
Many patients suffering from a range of diseases are already being helped with treatmentsdeveloped from adult stem cells.
However, most scientists, at least today, believe that research on embryonic stem cells offers
the most promise because these cells have the potential to develop in all of the tissues in thebody.
Scientists further believe that rapid progress in this research will come only with federal funds.
Federal dollars help attract the best and brightest scientists. They ensure new discoveries are
widely shared at the largest number of research facilities, and that the research is directedtoward the greatest  public good.
The United States has a long and proud record of leading the world toward advances in
science and medicine that improve human life, and the United States has a long and proud
record of upholding the highest standards of ethics as we expand the limits of science andknowledge.
Research on embryonic stem cells raises profound ethical questions, because extracting thestem cell destroys the embryo, and thus destroys its potential for life.

Like a snowflake, each of these embryos is unique, with the unique genetic potential of anindividual human being.
As I thought through this issue I kept returning to two fundamental questions. First, are these
frozen embryos human life and therefore something precious to be protected? And second, if
they're going to be destroyed anyway, shouldn't they be used for a greater good, for researchthat has the potential to save and improve other lives?
I've asked those questions and others of scientists, scholars, bio-ethicists, religious leaders,
doctors, researchers, members of Congress, my Cabinet and my friends. I have read heartfelt
letters from many Americans. I have given this issue a great deal of thought, prayer, andconsiderable reflection, and I have found widespread disagreement.
On the first issue, are these embryos human life? Well, one researcher told me he believes
this five-day-old cluster of cells is not an embryo, not yet an individual but a pre-embryo. He
argued that it has the potential for life, but it is not a life because it cannot develop on itsown.
An ethicist dismissed that as a callous attempt at rationalization. "Make no mistake," he told
me, "that cluster of cells is the same way you and I, and all the rest of us, started our lives.
One goes with a heavy heart if we use these," he said, "because we are dealing with the seedsof the next generation."
And to the other crucial question -- If these are going to be destroyed anyway, why not usethem for good purpose? -- I also found different answers.
Many are these embryos are byproducts of a process that helps create life and we should
allow couples to donate them to science so they can be used for good purpose instead of
wasting their potential.
Others will argue there is no such thing as excess life and the fact that a living being is goingto die does not justify experimenting on it or exploiting it as a natural resource.

At its core, this issue forces us to confront fundamental questions about the beginnings of life
and the ends of science. It lives at a difficult moral intersection, juxtaposing the need toprotect life in all its phases with the prospect of saving and improving life in all its stages.
As the discoveries of modern science create tremendous hope, they also lay vast ethical minefields.
As the genius of science extends the horizons of what we can do, we increasingly confront
complex questions about what we should do. We have arrived at that brave new world that
seemed so distant in 1932 when Alduous Huxley wrote about human beings created in testtubes in what he called a hatchery.
In recent weeks, we learned that scientists have created human embryos in test tubes solely
to experiment on them. This is deeply troubling and a warning sign that should prompt all ofus to  think through these issues very carefully.
Embryonic stem cell research is at the leading edge of a series of moral hazards. The initial
stem cell researcher was at first reluctant to begin his research, fearing it might be used for
human cloning. Scientists have already cloned a sheep. Researchers are telling us the next
step could be to clone human beings to create individual designer stem cells, essentially togrow another you, to be available in case you need another heart or lung or liver.
I strongly oppose human cloning, as do most Americans. We recoil at the idea of growinghuman beings for spare body parts or creating life for our convenience. 
And while we must devote enormous energy to conquering disease, it is equally important
that we pay attention to the moral concerns raised by the new frontier of human embryo stemcell research. Even the most noble ends do not justify any means.
My position on these issues is shaped by deeply held beliefs. I'm a strong supporter of science
and technology, and believe they have the potential for incredible good -- to improve lives, to
save life, to conquer disease. Research offers hope that millions of our loved ones may be
cured of a disease and rid of their suffering. I have friends whose children suffer from juvenile
diabetes. Nancy Reagan has written me about President Reagan's struggle with Alzheimer's.

My own family has confronted the tragedy of childhood leukemia. And like all Americans, Ihave great hope for cures.
I also believe human life is a sacred gift from our creator. I worry about a culture that
devalues life, and believe as your president I have an important obligation to foster andencourage respect for life in America and throughout the world.
And while we're all hopeful about the potential of this research, no one can be certain that thescience will live up to the hope it has generated.
Eight years ago, scientists believed fetal tissue research offered great hope for cures and
treatments, yet the progress to date has not lived up to its initial expectations. Embryonic
stem cell research offers both great promise and great peril, so I have decided we mustproceed with great care.
As a result of private research, more than 60 genetically diverse stem cell lines already exist.
They were created from embryos that have already been destroyed, and they have the abilityto regenerate themselves indefinitely, creating ongoing opportunities for research.
I have concluded that we should allow federal funds to be used for research on these existingstem cell lines, where the life-and- death decision has already been made.
Leading scientists tell me research on these 60 lines has great promise that could lead to
breakthrough therapies and cures. This allows us to explore the promise and potential of stem
cell 
research without crossing a fundamental moral line by providing taxpayer funding that would
sanction or encourage further destruction of human embryos that have at least the potentialfor life.
I also believe that great scientific progress can be made through aggressive federal funding of
research on umbilical cord, placenta, adult and animal stem cells, which do not involve the
same moral dilemma. This year your government will spent $250 million on this importantresearch.

I will also name a president's council to monitor stem cell research, to recommend appropriate
guidelines and regulations and to consider all of the medical and ethical ramifications of bio-
medical innovation.
This council will consist of leading scientists, doctors, ethicists, lawyers, theologians and
others, and will be chaired by Dr. Leon Cass, a leading bio-medical ethicist from the Universityof Chicago.
This council will keep us apprised of new developments and give our nation a forum tocontinue to discuss and evaluate these important issues.
As we go forward, I hope we will always be guided by both intellect and heart, by both ourcapabilities and our conscience. 
I have made this decision with great care, and I pray it is the right one.
Thank you for listening. Good night, and God bless America.