President Bush: Good afternoon, and welcome to the White House. Earlier today I
announced my intent to nominate Robert Gates to be the next Secretary of the Defense. And
now I'm pleased to introduce him to the American people. I also am looking forward to payingtribute to the man he will succeed. 
America remains a nation at war. We face brutal enemies who despise our freedom and want
to destroy our way of life. These enemies attacked our country on September the 11th, 2001;
they fight us in Afghanistan and Iraq, and they remain determined to attack our country
again. Against such enemies, there's only one way to protect the American people: We muststay on the offense and bring our enemies to justice before they hurt us again. 
In this time of war, the President relies on the Secretary of Defense to provide military advice
and direct our nation's Armed Forces as they engage our enemies across the world. The
Secretary of Defense must be a man of vision who can see threats still over the horizon, and
prepare our nation to meet them. Bob Gates is the right man to meet both of these criticalchallenges.

Bob is one of our nation's most accomplished public servants. He joined the CIA in 1966, and
has nearly 27 years of national security experience, serving six Presidents of both political
parties. He spent nearly nine years serving on the National Security Council staff. And at the
CIA, he rose from an entry-level employee to become the Director of the Central Intelligence.And his experience has prepared him well for this new assignment. 
Bob understands the challenges we face in Afghanistan. As President Reagan's Deputy
Director of Central Intelligence, he helped lead America's efforts to drive Soviet forces from
Afghanistan. Success in these efforts weakened the Soviet regime and helped hastenfreedom's victory in the Cold War. 
Bob understands the challenges facing our nation in Iraq. He served as Deputy National
Security Advisor to the first President Bush during Operation Desert Storm as American troops
repelled Iraqi aggression and drove Saddam Hussein's forces from Kuwait. More recently, he
served as a member of the Iraq Study Group, a distinguished independent panel of
Republicans and Democrats led by former Secretary of State Jim Baker and former
Congressman Lee Hamilton. As part of this commission, he has traveled to Iraq and met with
the country's leaders and our military commanders on the ground. He'll provide the
department with a fresh perspective and new ideas on how America can achieve our goals inIraq. 
Bob understands how to lead large, complex institutions and transform them to meet new
challenges. As Director of Central Intelligence, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, he
was responsible for leading all the foreign intelligence agencies of the United States. And he's
brought that same leadership and abilities as his work as President of our nation's sixth
largest university, Texas A&M. When the A&M board of regents interviewed him for the job, he
described himself as an agent of change. As president, he delivered on that promise, initiating
wide-ranging reforms to almost every aspect of campus life. He'll bring that sametransformational spirit to his work in the Department of Defense. 
Bob Gates is a patriot whose love for country was nurtured in the Kansas community where he
was raised. He's worn our nation's uniform. He's a strategic thinker who was educated at
three of America's finest universities, receiving his bachelor's degree from William & Mary, a
master's degree in history from Indiana University, and a doctorate in Russian and Soviethistory from Georgetown.

He's a leader in the business community who served on the boards of several major
corporations. He's a man of integrity, candor and sound judgment. He knows that the
challenge of protecting our country is larger than any political party, and he has a record of
working with leaders of both sides of the aisle to strengthen our national security. He has myconfidence and my trust, and he will be an outstanding Secretary of Defense. 
Bob follows in the footsteps of one of America's most skilled and capable national security
leaders, Donald Rumsfeld. Don is the longest-serving member of my Cabinet, and next month
he will reach another milestone when he becomes the longest-serving Secretary of Defense in
the history of our nation. I appreciate his willingness to continue serving until his successor is
in place, because in a time of war, our nation cannot be without a strong and steady handleading our Department of Defense. 
Don has served in times of great consequence for our nation. Few will forget the image of Don
Rumsfeld as he helped rescue workers carry the victims from the rubble of the Pentagon on
September the 11th, 2001. In the weeks that followed, he directed the effort to plan our
nation's military response to an unprecedented attack on our soil. Under his leadership, U.S.
and coalition forces launched one of the most innovative military campaigns in the history ofmodern warfare, driving the Taliban and its al Qaeda allies from power in a matter of weeks. 
In 2003, on my orders, he led the planning and execution of another historic military
campaign, Operation Iraqi Freedom, that drove Saddam Hussein from power and helped the
Iraqi people establish a constitutional democracy in the heart of the Middle East. History will
record that on Don Rumsfeld's watch, the men and women of our military overthrew two
terrorist regimes, liberated some 50 million people, brought justice to the terrorist Zarqawiand scores of senior al Qaeda operatives, and helped stop new terrorist attacks on our people. 
America is safer and the world is more secure because of the service and the leadership of
Donald Rumsfeld. As he led the Pentagon in an unprecedented war, Don never took his eye off
another vital responsibility, preparing America for the threats that await us as this new
century unfolds. He developed a new defense strategy. He established a new Northern
Command to protect the homeland, a new Joint Forces Command to focus on transformation,
a new Strategic Command to defend against long-range attack, and transformed the U.S.Special Operations Command for the war on terror.

He led our efforts to create a new NATO Response Force that allows NATO to deploy rapidly
anywhere in the world. He undertook the most sweeping transformation of America's global
force posture since the end of World War II. He revitalized America's efforts to develop and
deploy ballistic missile defenses, and led a comprehensive review of America's nuclear forcesthat has allowed us to undertake dramatic reductions in offensive nuclear weapons. 
Don's work in these areas did not often make the headlines. But the reforms that he has set in
motion are historic, and they will enhance the security of the American people for decades tocome. 
Over the past six years, I've relied on Don Rumsfeld's advice and counsel. I've come to know
his character and his integrity. As the Secretary of Defense, he has been dedicated to his
mission, loyal to his President, and devoted to the courageous men and women of our ArmedForces. 
Don once famously said, "There are known knowns; there are known unknowns; and there
are unknown unknowns." Well, Mr. Secretary, here is a known known: Your service has made
America stronger, and made America a safer nation. You will be missed, and I wish you andJoyce all the best in the years to come. 
Don Rumsfeld is a tough act to follow. That's why I picked a man of Bob Gates's caliber to
succeed him. When confirmed by the Senate, Bob will bring talent, energy and innovation to
the Department of Defense. He'll work every day to keep the American people safe and to
make our nation more secure. And he'll do a superb job as America's next Secretary ofDefense. 
Bob, I appreciate you agreeing to serve our nation again, and congratulations. 
Robert Gates: Thank you, sir. Mr. President, thank you for this high honor and for your
confidence. And let me add my thanks to Secretary Rumsfeld for his service. I entered public
service 40 years ago last August. President Bush will be the seventh President I have served. I
had not anticipated returning to government service, and have never enjoyed any position
more than being president of Texas A&M University. However, the United States is at war, in
Iraq and Afghanistan. We're fighting against terrorism worldwide.

And we face other serious challenges to peace and our security. I believe the outcome of
these conflicts will shape our world for decades to come. Because our long-term strategic
interests and our national and homeland security are at risk, because so many of America's
sons and daughters in our Armed Forces are in harm's way, I did not hesitate when thePresident asked me to return to duty. 
If confirmed by the Senate, I will serve with all my heart, and with gratitude to the Presidentfor giving me the opportunity to do so. 
Secretary Rumsfeld: Bob Gates, my congratulations to you on this nomination. My very bestwishes. Look forward to working with you in the transition. 
Mr. President, thank you for your kind words, and the wholly unexpected opportunity you
provided me to serve in the Department of Defense again these past years -- six years. It's
been quite a time. It recalls to mind the statement by Winston Churchill, something to the
effect that "I have benefited greatly from criticism, and at no time have I suffered a lackthereof."
The great respect that I have for your leadership, Mr. President, in this little understood,
unfamiliar war, the first war of the 21st century -- it is not well-known, it was not well-
understood, it is complex for people to comprehend. And I know, with certainty, that overtime the contributions you've made will be recorded by history. 
I must say that it's been the highest honor of my life to serve with the talented men and
women of the Department of Defense, the amazing men and women -- young men and
women in uniform. It's a privilege. And their patriotism, their professionalism, their dedicationis truly an inspiration. They have my respect; they will remain in my prayers always. 
Thank you.