Hillary, for being my wife, my friend, and my partner in our efforts to build a better future for the children and families of Arkansas and America.
Restoring the hopes of the forgotten middle class...
It is what we've devoted ourselves to here in Arkansas.
I'm proud of what we've done here in Arkansas together.
Proud of the work we've done to become a laboratory of democracy and innovation.
And proud that we've done it without giving up the things we cherish and honor most about our way of life.
For the Soviet Empire never lost to us on the field of battle.
I applaud the President's recent initiative in reducing nuclear weapons.
It is an important beginning.
But make no mistake - the end of the Cold War is not the end of threats to America.
The world is still a dangerous and uncertain place.
No vision, no action.
They've used it to divide us for years.
They washed their hands of responsibility for the economy and education and health care and social policy and turned it over to fifty states and a thousand points of light.
Well, here in Arkansas we've done our best to create jobs and educate our people.
And we will.
We have to do a better job of the old-fashioned work of confronting the real problems of real people and pointing the way to a better future.
It's both, and it's different.
The small towns and main streets of America aren't like the corridors and backrooms of Washington.
People out here don't care about the idle rhetoric of left and right and liberal and conservative and all the other words that have made our politics a substitute for action.
We don't need another President who doesn't know what he wants to do for America.
I'm going to tell you in plain language what I intend to do as President.
How we can meet the challenges we face - that's the test for all the Democratic candidates in this campaign.
It's just common sense.
Government's responsibility is to create more opportunity.
We've got to grow this economy, not shrink it.
We need to give people Incentives to make long-term investment in America and reward people who produce goods and services, not those who speculate with other people's money.
We've got to invest more money in emerging technologies to help keep high-paying jobs here at home.
The American people don't want to run from the world.
We need more than photo ops and empty rhetoric - we need standards and accountability and excellence in education.
And we don't have to bankrupt the taxpayers to do it.
We do have to take on the big insurance companies and health care bureaucracies and get some real cost control into the system.
Across America, citizens are banding together to take their streets and neighborhoods back.
I'm not out to soak the rich.
I wouldn't mind being rich.
But I do believe the rich should pay their fair share.
For 12 years, the Republicans have raised taxes on the middle class.
We should give people on welfare the skills they need to succeed, but we should demand that everybody who can work and become a productive member of society.
Governments don't raise children, parents do.
If you drop out for no good reason, you should lose your driver's license.
When they ran their companies into the ground and their employees were on the street, what did they do? They bailed out with golden parachutes to a cushy life.
They changed America by standing up for what's right.
When Salomon Brothers abused the Treasury markets, the President was silent.
In a Clinton Administration, when people sell their companies and their workers and their country down the river, they'll get called on the carpet.
We spent more money on the present and the past and less on the future.
We spent $500 billion to recycle assets in the S&L mess, but we couldn't afford $5 billion for unemployed workers or to give every kid in this country the chance to be in Head Start.
I want to reinvent government to make it more efficient and more effective.
I want to give citizens more choices in the services they get, and empower them to make those choices.
That's what we've tried to do in Arkansas.
We've balanced the budget every year and improved services.
We need a new spirit of community, a sense that we are all in this together.
If we have no sense of community the American dream will continue to wither.
Our destiny is bound up with the destiny of every other American.
We talked to a dozen sixth graders, whose number one concern was being shot going to and from school.
Their second worry was turning 12 or 13 and being forced to join a gang or be beaten.
My mother had been widowed three months before I was born.
I was raised for four years by my grandparents, while she went back to nursing school.
They didn't have much money.
I spent a lot of time with my great-grandparents.
By any standard, they were poor.
But we didn't blame other people.
We took responsibility for ourselves and for each other because we knew we could do better.
And that is our generation's responsibility - to form a new covenant...
We can usher in a new era of progress, prosperity and renewal.
We can &mdash; we must.
This is not just a campaign for the Presidency &mdash; it is a campaign for the future, for the forgotten hard-working middle class families of America who deserve a government that fights for them.
A campaign to keep America strong at home and around the world.
Join with us.
I ask for your prayers, your help, your hands, and your hearts.
Together we can make America great again, and build a community of hope that will inspire the world.