Governor Richards, Chairman Brown, Mayor Dinkins, our great host, my fellow delegates and my fellow Americans, I am so proud of Al Gore.He said he came here tonight because he always wanted to do the warm-up for Elvis.
Well, I ran for President this year for one reason and one reason only: I wanted to come back to this convention and finish that speech I started four years ago.Last night Mario Cuomo taught us how a real nominating speech should be given.
He also made it clear why we have to steer our ship of state on a new course.
The Cold War is over.
Soviet communism has collapsed and our values -- freedom, democracy, individual rights, free enterprise- they have triumphed all around the world.
Its time for a change in America.Tonight 10 million of our fellow Americans are out of work, tens of millions more work harder for lower pay.
The incumbent President says that unemployment always goes up a little before a recovery begins, but unemployment only has to go up by one more person before a real recovery can begin.
And Mr.
My mother taught me.
She taught me about family and hard work and sacrifice.
Thank you, Mother.
I love you.When I think about opportunity for all Americans, I think about my grandfather.
He ran a country store in our little town of Hope.
There was no food stamps back then, so when his customers, whether they were White or Black who worked hard and did the best they could, came in with no money, well, he gave them food anyway.
He just made a note of it.
So did I.Before I was big enough to see over the counter, I learned from him to look up to people other folks looked down on.My grandfather just had a high school education- a grade school education- but in that country store he taught me more about equality in the eyes of the Lord than all my professors at Georgetown, more about the intrinsic worth of every individual that all the philosophers at Oxford, more about the need for equal justice under the law than all the jurists at Yale Law School.If you want to know where I come by the passionate commitment I have to bringing people together without regard to race, it all started with my grandfather.I learned a lot from another person too: a person who for more than 20 years has worked hard to help our children, paying the price of time to make sure our schools don't fail them.
I love you.Frankly, I am fed up with politicians in Washington lecturing the rest of us about family values.
Our families have values.
But our government doesn't.I want an America where family values live in our actions, not just in our speeches.
An America that includes every family.
Every traditional family and every extended family.
Every two parent family.
Every single-parent family.
And every foster family.
Every family.I do want to say something to the fathers in this country who have chosen to abandon their children by neglecting their child support: Take responsibility for your children or we will force you to do so.
Because governments don't raise children; parents do.
And you should.And I want to say something to every child in America tonight who is out there trying to grow up without a father or a mother: I know how you feel.
And don't you ever let anybody tell you can't become whatever you want to be.
And if other politicians make you feel like you are not part of their family, come on and be part of ours.The thing that makes me angriest about what has gone wrong in the last 12 years is that our government has lost touch with our values, while our politicians continue to shout about them.
I'm tired of it!I was raised to believe the American Dream was built on rewarding hard work.
And their incomes are still going down.
Their taxes are still going up.
And the costs of health care, housing and education are going through the roof.Meanwhile, more and more of our best people are falling into poverty even though they work 40 hours a week.Our people are pleading for change, but government is in the way.
It has been hijacked by privileged private interests.
It has forgotten who really pays the bills around here.
It has taken more of your money and given you less in return.
We have got to go beyond the brain-dead politics in Washington and give our people the kind of government they deserve, a government that works for them.A President ought to be a powerful force for progress.
But right now I know how President Lincoln felt when General McClellan wouldn't attack in the Civil War.
He asked him, If you're not going to use your army, may I borrow it?And so I say: George Bush, if you won't use our power to help America, step aside.
I will.Our country is falling behind.
The President is caught in the grip of a failed economic theory.
Now under President Bush, America has an unpleasant economy struck somewhere between Germany and Sri Lanka.And for most Americans, Mr.
Sympathy.
Al Gore and I can do better.He has raised taxes on the people driving pickup trucks and lowered taxes on the people riding in limousines.
In fact, the budgets he has submitted to Congress nearly doubled the debt.
Even worse, he wasted billions and reduced our investments in education and jobs.
We can do better.So if you are sick and tired of a government that doesn't work to create jobs, if you're sick and tired of a tax system that's stacked against you, if you're sick and tired of exploding debt and reduced investments in our future, or if, like the great civil rights pioneer Fannie Lou Hamer, you're just plain old sick and tired of being sick and tired , then join us, work with us, win with us, and we can make our country the country it was meant to be.Now, George Bush talks a good game, but he has no game plan to rebuild America, from the cities to the suburbs to the countryside, so that we can compete and win again in the global economy.
I do.He won't take on the big insurance companies and the bureaucracies to control health costs and give us affordable health care for all Americans, but I will.He won't even implement the recommendations of his own commission on AIDS, but I will.He won't streamline the federal government and change the way it works, cut 100,000 bureaucrats and put 100,000 new police officers on the streets of American cities, but I will.He's never balanced a government budget, but I have 11 times.He won't break the stranglehold the special interests have on our elections and the lobbyists have on our government, but I will.He won't give mothers and fathers the simple chance to take some time off from work when a baby is born or a parent it sick, but I will.We're losing our farms at a rapid rate, and he has no commitment to keep family farms in the family, but I do.He's talked a lot about drugs, but he hasn't helped people on the front line to wage that war on drugs and crime.
But I will.He won't take the lead in protecting the environment and creating new jobs in environmental technologies for the 21st century, but I will.
Here me now.
I am not pro-abortion; I am pro-choice, strongly.
I believe this difficult and painful decision should be left to the women of America.I hope the right to privacy can be protected and we will never again have to discuss this issue on political platforms.
But I am old enough to remember what it was like before Roe v.
Wade, and I do not want to return to the time when we made criminals of women and their doctors.Jobs, education, health care- these are not just commitments from my lips; they are the work of my life.Our priorities must be clear; we will put our people first again.
But priorities without a clear plan of action are just empty words.
To turn our rhetoric into reality we've got to change the way government does business, fundamentally.
They don't want to fix government; they still want to campaign against it, and that's all.But, my fellow Democrats, its time for us to realize we've got some changing to do too.
There is not a program in government for every problem, and if we want to use government to help people, we have got to make it work again.Because we are committed in this Convention and in this Platform to making these changes, we are, as Democrats, in the words that Ross Perot himself spoke today, a revitalized Democratic Party.I am well aware that all those millions of people who rallied to Ross Perot's cause wanted to be in an army of patriots for change.
Tonight I say to them, join us, and together we will revitalize America.Now, I don't have all the answers, but I do know the old ways don't work.
Trickledown economics has sure failed.
More choices for young people in the schools they attend- in the public schools they attend.
And more choices for the elderly and for people with disabilities and the long-term care they receive.
We offer opportunity.
We demand responsibility.
We will build an American community again.
The choice we offer is not conservative or liberal.
In many ways, it is not even Republican or Democratic.
It is different.
It is new.
And it will work.
He mocks it as the vision thing.But just remember what the Scripture says: Where there is no vision, the people perish.I hope nobody in this great hall tonight, or in our beloved country has to go through tomorrow without a vision.
I hope no one ever tries to raise a child without a vision.
I hope nobody ever starts a business or plants a crop in the ground without a vision.
For where there is no vision, the people perish.One of the reasons we have so many children in so much trouble in so many places in this nation is because they have seen so little opportunity, so little responsibility, so little loving, caring community, that they literally cannot imagine the life we are calling them to lead.And so I say again: Where there is no vision, America will perish.
But you must do your part, you must be responsible.
We will say: Everybody can borrow money to go to college.
But you must do your part.
You must pay it back, from your paychecks or, better yet, by going back home and serving your communities.Just think of it.
Think of it.
Millions of energetic young men and women serving their country by policing the streets or teaching the children or caring for the sick.
Or working with the elderly and people with disabilities.
But you must do your part.
We will say to those on welfare: You will have, and you deserve, the opportunity, through training and education, through child care and medical coverage, to liberate yourself.
I know well that the world needs a strong America, but we have learned that strength begins at home.But the New Covenant is about more than opportunities and responsibilities for you and your families.
It is time to heal America.And so we must say to every American: Look beyond the stereotypes that blind us.
We need each other - all of us - we need each other.
Them, the liberals.
Them, the poor.
Them, the homeless.
Them, the people with disabilities.
Them, and them, and them.But this is America.
There is no them.
There is only us.One nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.That is our Pledge of Allegiance, and that's what the New Covenant is all about.How do I know we can come together and make change happen? Because I have seen it in my own state.
In Arkansas, we are working together, and we are making progress.
No, there's no Arkansas Miracle, but there are a lot of miraculous people.
And because of them, our schools are better, our wages are higher, our factories are busier, our water is cleaner and our budget is balanced.
We're moving ahead.I wish I could say the same thing about America under the incumbent President.
He took the richest country in the world and brought it down.We took on of the poorest states in America and lifted it up.And so I say to all of those, in this campaign season who would criticize Arkansas, come on down.
Especially if you're from Washington, come on down.Sure, you'll see us struggling against some of the problems that we haven't solved yet, but you'll also see a lot of great people doing amazing things, and you might even learn a thing or two.In the end, my fellow Americans, this New Covenant simply asks us all to be Americans again- old-fashioned Americans for a new time.
Throughout the whole history of this country, we have seen, time and time and time again, that when we are united we are unstoppable.We can seize this moment, make it exciting and energizing and heroic to be American again.
We can renew our faith in each other and in ourselves.
No President can.
We must do it together.
It won't be easy, and it won't be quick.
We didn't get into this mess overnight, and we won't get out of it overnight.
But we can do it- with commitment, creativity, diversity and drive.We can do it.
We can do it.We can do it.
We can do it.
And then, as a student at Georgetown, I head that call clarified by a professor name Carol Quigley, who said to us that America was the greatest Nation in history because our people had always believed in two things- that tomorrow can be better than today and that every one of us has a personal moral responsibility to make it so.That kind of future entered my life the night our daughter, Chelsea, was born.
Let it be our cause to give that child a happy home, a healthy family and a hopeful future.
Let it be our cause to see that that child has a chance to live to the fullest of her God-given capacities.Let it be our cause to see that child grow up strong and secure, braced by her challenges but never struggling alone, with family and friends and a faith that in America, no one is left out; no one is left behind.Let it be our cause that when this child is able, she gives something back to her children, her community and her country.
Let it be our cause that we give this child a country that is coming together, not coming apart, a country of boundless hopes and endless dreams, a country once again lifts its people and inspires the world.
Let that be our cause our commitment and our New Covenant.My fellow Americans, I end tonight where it all began for me- I still believe in a place called Hope.
God bless you, and God Bless America.