She had thick blond hair, big glasses, wore no makeup, and she had a sense of strength and self-possession that I found magnetic.
After the class I followed her out, intending to introduce myself.
I got close enough to touch her back, but I couldn't do it.
Somehow I knew this would not be just another tap on the shoulder, that I might be starting something I couldn't stop.And I saw her several more times in the next few days, but I still didn't speak to her.
Then one night I was in the law library talking to a classmate who wanted me to join the Yale Law Journal.
He said it would guarantee me a job in a big firm or a clerkship with a federal judge.
I really wasn't interested, I just wanted to go home to Arkansas.
Finally she was staring back at me, so I watched her.
She closed her book, put it down and started walking toward me.
I remember, she was wearing a long, white, flowery skirt.
And I went up to her and she said she was going to register for classes for the next term.
And I said I'd go, too.
And I thought, well, heck, since my cover's been blown I just went ahead and asked her to take a walk down to the art museum.We've been walking and talking and laughing together ever since.
We cried together this morning on the news that our good friend and a lot of your good friend, Mark Weiner, passed away early this morning.We've built up a lifetime of memories.
Her crusty, conservative father, her rambunctious brothers, all extolling the virtues of rooting for the Bears and the Cuba.
She was more liberal than the boys.
And she had a childhood that made mine look like a piece of cake.
She was easy to underestimate with her soft manner and she reminded me all over again of the truth of that old saying you should never judge a book by its covers.
Knowing her was one of the greatest gifts Hillary ever gave me.
He took her downtown to Chicago to hear Dr.
Martin Luther King speak and he remained her friend for the rest of his life.
This will be the only campaign of hers he ever missed.When she got to college, her support for civil rights, her opposition to the Vietnam War compelled her to change party, to become a Democrat.
She got so involved in children's issues that she actually took an extra year in law school working at the child studies center to learn what more could be done to improve the lives and the futures of poor children.
In the summer of 1972, she went to Dothan, Alabama to visit one of those segregated academies that then enrolled over half-a-million white kids in the South.
The only way the economics worked is if they claimed federal tax exemptions to which they were not legally entitled.
She got sent to prove they weren't.So she sauntered into one of these academies all by herself, pretending to be a housewife that had just moved to town and needed to find a school for her son.
And they exchanged pleasantries and finally she said, look, let's just get to the bottom line here, if I enroll my son in this school will he be in a segregated school, yes or know? And the guy said absolutely.
And she went back and her encounter was part of a report that gave Marian Marian Wright Edelman the ammunition she needed to keep working to force the Nixon administration to take those tax exemptions away and give our kids access to an equal education.
I think some of them are still around to vote for her in 2016.
And she filed a report on that, which led to some changes, too.
Always making things better.
I was trying to convince her to marry me.
And we were on the shoreline of this wonderful little lake, Lake Ennerdale.
I asked her to marry me and she said I can't do it.
This time trying to figure out why so many kids counted in the Census weren't enrolled in school.
She found one of them sitting alone on her porch in a wheelchair.
Once more, she filed a report about these kids, and that helped influence ultimately the Congress to adopt the proposition that children with disabilities, physical or otherwise, should have equal access to public education.
I said I really want you to marry me, but you shouldn't do it.
I said I know, but it's true.
And I meant it, it was true.I said I know most of the young Democrats our age who want to go into politics, they mean well and they speak well, but none of them is as good as you are at actually doing things to make positive changes in people's lives.
She just laughed and said, are you out of you mind, nobody would ever vote for me.
And she decided to take a huge chance.
She moved to a strange place, more rural, more culturally conservative than anyplace she had ever been, where she knew good and well people would wonder what in the world she was like and whether they could or should accept her.Didn't take them long to find out what she was like.
She loved her teaching and she got frustrated when one of her students said, well, what do you expect, I'm just from Arkansas.
She said, don't tell me that, you're as smart as anybody, you've just got to believe in yourself and work hard and set high goals.
She believed that anybody could make it.
And one day I was driving her to the airport to fly back to Chicago when we passed this little brick house that had a for sale sign on it.
And she said, boy, that's a pretty house.
It had 1,100 square feet, an attic, fan and no air conditioner in hot Arkansas, and a screened-in porch.Hillary commented on what a uniquely designed and beautiful house it was.
So I took a big chance.
I bought the house.
My mortgage was $175 a month.
I said, while you were gone I bought it, you have to marry me now.
I married my best friend.
I was still in awe after more than four years of being around her at how smart and strong and loving and caring she was.
And I really hoped that her choosing me and rejecting my advice to pursue her own career was a decision she would never regret.A little over a year later we moved to Little Rock when I became attorney general and she joined the oldest law firm west of the Mississippi.
Soon after, she started a group called the Arkansas Advocates for Families and Children.
They recommended to do that partly by deploying trained nurse practitioners in places with no doctors to provide primary care they were trained to provide.
It was a big deal then, highly controversial and very important.And I got the feeling that what she did for the rest of her life she was doing there.
She just went out and figured out what needed to be done and what made the most sense and what would help the most people.
And then if it was controversial she'd just try to persuade people it was the right thing to do.
We found out we were going to be parents.
On February 27th, 1980, 15 minutes after I got home from the National Governors Conference in Washington, Hillary's water broke and off we went to the hospital.
Chelsea was born just before midnight.
The miracle of a new beginning.
The hole it filled for me because my own father died before I was born, and the absolute conviction that my daughter had the best mother in the whole world.
The truth is we rarely disagreed on parenting, although she did believe that I had gone a little over the top when I took a couple of days off with Chelsea to watch all six Police Academy movies back-to-back.
And I became overnight, I think, the youngest former governor in the history of the country.
We only had two-year terms back then.Hillary was great.
Immediately she said, OK, what are we going to do? Here's what we're going to do, we're going to get a house, you're going to get a job, we're going to enjoy being Chelsea's parents.
And if you really want to run again, you've got to go out and talk to people and figure out why you lost, tell people you got the message and show them you've still got good ideas.I followed her advice.
Within two days we had a house, I soon had a job.
We had two fabulous years with Chelsea.
And in 1982, I became the first governor in the history of our state to be elected, defeated and elected again.
The rest of the decade sort of flew by as our lives settled into a rhythm of family and work and friends.In 1983, Hillary chaired a committee to recommend new education standards for us as a part of and in response to a court order to equalize school funding and a report by a national expert that said our woefully underfunded schools were the worst in America.Typical Hillary, she held listening tours in all 75 counties with our committee.
She came up with really ambitious recommendations.
For example, that we be the first state in America to require elementary counselors in every school because so many kids were having trouble at home and they needed it.
And that's because of those standards that Hillary developed.
The idea was to teach low-income parents, even those that couldn't read, to be their children's first teachers.She said she thought it would work in Arkansas.
I said that's great, what are we going to do about it? She said, oh, I already did it.
I called the woman who started the program in Israel, she'll be here in about 10 days and help us get started.Next thing you know I'm being dragged around to all these little preschool graduations.
Now, keep in mind, this was before any state even had universal kindergarten and I'm being dragged to preschool graduations watching these poor parents with tears in their eyes because they never thought they'd be able to help their kids learn.
There are a lot of young adults in America who have no idea Hillary had anything to do with it who are enjoying better lives because they were in that program.She did all this while being a full-time worker, a mother and enjoying our life.
Why? Well, she's insatiably curious, she's a natural leader, she's a good organizer, and she's the best darn change-maker I ever met in my entire life.
This is a really important point for you to take out of this convention.
If you believe in making change from the bottom up, if you believe the measure of change is how many people's lives are better, you know it's hard and some people think it's boring.
So people say, well, we need to change.
She's been around a long time, she sure has, and she's sure been worth every single year she's put into making people's lives better.
If you were sitting where I'm sitting and you heard what I have heard at every dinner conversation, every lunch conversation, on every lone walk, you would say this woman has never been satisfied with the status quo in anything.
She always wants to move the ball forward.
That is just who she is.
You all know we failed because we couldn't break a Senate filibuster.
Hillary immediately went to work on solving the problems the bill sought to address one by one.
The most important goal was to get more children with health insurance.
It insures more than 8 million kids.
There are a lot of other things in that bill that she got done piece by piece, pushing that rock up the hill.In 1997, she also teamed with the House Minority Leader Tom DeLay, who maybe disliked me more than any of Newt Gingrich's crowd.
They worked on a bill together to increase adoptions of children under foster care.
She wanted to do it because she knew that Tom DeLay, for all of our differences, was an adoptive parent and she honored him for doing that.
It made life better because she's a change-maker, that's what she does.
1997 was the year Chelsea finished high school and went to college.
We were happy for her, but sad for us to see her go.
I'll never forget moving her into her dorm room at Stanford.
It would have been a great little reality flick.
So we closed a big chapter in the most important work of our lives.
As you'll see Thursday night when Chelsea speaks, Hillary's done a pretty fine job of being a mother.
We had always intended to go to New York after I left office and commute to Arkansas, but this had never occurred to either one of us.
Hillary had never run for office before, but she decided to give it a try.She began her campaign the way she always does new things, by listening and and learning.
And after a tough battle, New York elected her to the seat once held by another outsider, Robert Kennedy.
Her early years were dominated by 9/11, by working to fund the recovery, then monitoring the health and providing compensation to victims and first and second responders.
She and Senator Schumer were tireless and so were our House members.In 2003, partly spurred on by what we were going through, she became the first senator in the history of New York ever to serve on the Armed Services Committee.
She tried to expand and did expand health care coverage to Reservists and members of the National Guard.
She got longer family leave, working with Senator Dodd, for people caring for wounded service members.And she worked for more extensive care for people with traumatic brain injury.
She also served on a special Pentagon commission to propose changes necessary to meet our new security challenges.
Newt Gingrich was on that commission, he told me what a good job she had done.
They are a national treasure of all races, all religions, all walks of life.
She voted for and against some proposed trade deals.
She became the de facto economic development officer for the area of New York outside the ambit of New York City.She worked for farmers, for winemakers, for small businesses and manufacturers, for upstate cities in rural areas who needed more ideas and more new investment to create good jobs, something we have to do again in small-town and rural America, in neighborhoods that have been left behind in our cities and Indian country and, yes, in coal country.
But she hesitated to say yes when he asked her to join his Cabinet because she so loved being a senator from New York.So like me, in a different context, he had to keep asking.
And in what The Wall Street Journal no less called a half-court shot at the buzzer, she got Russia and China to support them.
Her team negotiated the New START Treaty with Russia to reduce nuclear weapons and reestablish inspections.
And she got enough Republican support to get two-thirds of the Senate, the vote necessary to ratify the treaty.
She tripled the number of people with AIDS in poor countries whose lives are being saved with your tax dollars, most of them in Africa, going from 1.7 million lives to 5.1 million lives and it didn't cost you any more money.
She just bought available FDA-approved generic drugs, something we need to do for the American people more.
You don't know any of those 3.4 million people, but I'll guarantee you they know you.
They know you because they see you as thinking their lives matter.
They know you and that's one reason the approval of the United States was 20 points higher when she left the secretary of state's office than when she took it.
One is real, the other is made up.You just have to decide.
You just have to decide which is which, my fellow Americans.The real one had done more positive change-making before she was 30 than many public officials do in a lifetime in office.
Cartoons are two-dimensional, they're easy to absorb.
Life in the real world is complicated and real change is hard.
And a lot of people even think it's boring.
You guys calm down.Look, I have lived a long, full, blessed life, it really took off when I met and fell in love with that girl in the spring of 1971.
When I was president, I worked hard to give you more peace and shared prosperity, to give you an America where nobody is invisible or counted out.
And she is still the best darn change-maker I have ever known.
That is just who she is.
But we won't get to them if America makes the wrong choice in this election.
That's why you should elect her.
And you should elect her because she'll never quit when the going gets tough.
She'll never quit on you.She sent me in this primary to West Virginia where she knew we were going to lose, to look those coal miners in the eye and say I'm down here because Hillary sent me to tell you that if you really think you can get the economy back you had 50 years ago, have at it, vote for whoever you want to.
But if she wins, she is coming back for you to take you along on the ride to America's future.
We want you.
You know it because she's spent a lifetime doing it.
I hope you will do it.
I hope you will elect her.
Those of us who have more yesterdays than tomorrows tend to care more about our children and grandchildren.
The reason you should elect her is that in the greatest country on earth we have always been about tomorrow.
You children and grandchildren will bless you forever if you do.God bless you.
Thank you.